Chapter I

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND PASSEPARTOUT ACCEPT EACH OTHER,
THE ONE AS MASTER, THE OTHER AS MAN


Mr. Phileas Fogg lived, in 1872, at No. 7, Saville Row, Burlington
Gardens, the house in which Sheridan died in 1814.  He was one of the
most noticeable members of the Reform Club, though he seemed always to
avoid attracting attention; an enigmatical personage, about whom little
was known, except that he was a polished man of the world.  People said
that he resembled Byron--at least that his head was Byronic; but he was
a bearded, tranquil Byron, who might live on a thousand years without
growing old.

Certainly an Englishman, it was more doubtful whether Phileas Fogg was
a Londoner.  He was never seen on 'Change, nor at the Bank, nor in the
counting-rooms of the "City"; no ships ever came into London docks of
which he was the owner; he had no public employment; he had never been
entered at any of the Inns of Court, either at the Temple, or Lincoln's
Inn, or Gray's Inn; nor had his voice ever resounded in the Court of
Chancery, or in the Exchequer, or the Queen's Bench, or the
Ecclesiastical Courts.  He certainly was not a manufacturer; nor was he
a merchant or a gentleman farmer.  His name was strange to the
scientific and learned societies, and he never was known to take part
in the sage deliberations of the Royal Institution or the London
Institution, the Artisan's Association, or the Institution of Arts and
Sciences.  He belonged, in fact, to none of the numerous societies
which swarm in the English capital, from the Harmonic to that of the
Entomologists, founded mainly for the purpose of abolishing pernicious
insects.

Phileas Fogg was a member of the Reform, and that was all.

The way in which he got admission to this exclusive club was simple
enough.

He was recommended by the Barings, with whom he had an open credit.
His cheques were regularly paid at sight from his account current,
which was always flush.

Was Phileas Fogg rich?  Undoubtedly.  But those who knew him best could
not imagine how he had made his fortune, and Mr. Fogg was the last
person to whom to apply for the information.  He was not lavish, nor,
on the contrary, avaricious; for, whenever he knew that money was
needed for a noble, useful, or benevolent purpose, he supplied it
quietly and sometimes anonymously.  He was, in short, the least
communicative of men.  He talked very little, and seemed all the more
mysterious for his taciturn manner.  His daily habits were quite open
to observation; but whatever he did was so exactly the same thing that
he had always done before, that the wits of the curious were fairly
puzzled.

Had he travelled?  It was likely, for no one seemed to know the world
more familiarly; there was no spot so secluded that he did not appear
to have an intimate acquaintance with it.  He often corrected, with a
few clear words, the thousand conjectures advanced by members of the
club as to lost and unheard-of travellers, pointing out the true
probabilities, and seeming as if gifted with a sort of second sight, so
often did events justify his predictions.  He must have travelled
everywhere, at least in the spirit.

It was at least certain that Phileas Fogg had not absented himself from
London for many years.  Those who were honoured by a better
acquaintance with him than the rest, declared that nobody could pretend
to have ever seen him anywhere else.  His sole pastimes were reading
the papers and playing whist.  He often won at this game, which, as a
silent one, harmonised with his nature; but his winnings never went
into his purse, being reserved as a fund for his charities.  Mr. Fogg
played, not to win, but for the sake of playing.  The game was in his
eyes a contest, a struggle with a difficulty, yet a motionless,
unwearying struggle, congenial to his tastes.

Phileas Fogg was not known to have either wife or children, which may
happen to the most honest people; either relatives or near friends,
which is certainly more unusual.  He lived alone in his house in
Saville Row, whither none penetrated.  A single domestic sufficed to
serve him.  He breakfasted and dined at the club, at hours
mathematically fixed, in the same room, at the same table, never taking
his meals with other members, much less bringing a guest with him; and
went home at exactly midnight, only to retire at once to bed.  He never
used the cosy chambers which the Reform provides for its favoured
members.  He passed ten hours out of the twenty-four in Saville Row,
either in sleeping or making his toilet.  When he chose to take a walk
it was with a regular step in the entrance hall with its mosaic
flooring, or in the circular gallery with its dome supported by twenty
red porphyry Ionic columns, and illumined by blue painted windows.
When he breakfasted or dined all the resources of the club--its
kitchens and pantries, its buttery and dairy--aided to crowd his table
with their most succulent stores; he was served by the gravest waiters,
in dress coats, and shoes with swan-skin soles, who proffered the
viands in special porcelain, and on the finest linen; club decanters,
of a lost mould, contained his sherry, his port, and his
cinnamon-spiced claret; while his beverages were refreshingly cooled
with ice, brought at great cost from the American lakes.

If to live in this style is to be eccentric, it must be confessed that
there is something good in eccentricity.

The mansion in Saville Row, though not sumptuous, was exceedingly
comfortable.  The habits of its occupant were such as to demand but
little from the sole domestic, but Phileas Fogg required him to be
almost superhumanly prompt and regular.  On this very 2nd of October he
had dismissed James Forster, because that luckless youth had brought
him shaving-water at eighty-four degrees Fahrenheit instead of
eighty-six; and he was awaiting his successor, who was due at the house
between eleven and half-past.

Phileas Fogg was seated squarely in his armchair, his feet close
together like those of a grenadier on parade, his hands resting on his
knees, his body straight, his head erect; he was steadily watching a
complicated clock which indicated the hours, the minutes, the seconds,
the days, the months, and the years.  At exactly half-past eleven Mr.
Fogg would, according to his daily habit, quit Saville Row, and repair
to the Reform.

A rap at this moment sounded on the door of the cosy apartment where
Phileas Fogg was seated, and James Forster, the dismissed servant,
appeared.

"The new servant," said he.

A young man of thirty advanced and bowed.

"You are a Frenchman, I believe," asked Phileas Fogg, "and your name is
John?"

"Jean, if monsieur pleases," replied the newcomer, "Jean Passepartout,
a surname which has clung to me because I have a natural aptness for
going out of one business into another.  I believe I'm honest,
monsieur, but, to be outspoken, I've had several trades.  I've been an
itinerant singer, a circus-rider, when I used to vault like Leotard,
and dance on a rope like Blondin.  Then I got to be a professor of
gymnastics, so as to make better use of my talents; and then I was a
sergeant fireman at Paris, and assisted at many a big fire.  But I
quitted France five years ago, and, wishing to taste the sweets of
domestic life, took service as a valet here in England.  Finding myself
out of place, and hearing that Monsieur Phileas Fogg was the most exact
and settled gentleman in the United Kingdom, I have come to monsieur in
the hope of living with him a tranquil life, and forgetting even the
name of Passepartout."

"Passepartout suits me," responded Mr. Fogg.  "You are well recommended
to me; I hear a good report of you.  You know my conditions?"

"Yes, monsieur."

"Good!  What time is it?"

"Twenty-two minutes after eleven," returned Passepartout, drawing an
enormous silver watch from the depths of his pocket.

"You are too slow," said Mr. Fogg.

"Pardon me, monsieur, it is impossible--"

"You are four minutes too slow.  No matter; it's enough to mention the
error.  Now from this moment, twenty-nine minutes after eleven, a.m.,
this Wednesday, 2nd October, you are in my service."

Phileas Fogg got up, took his hat in his left hand, put it on his head
with an automatic motion, and went off without a word.

Passepartout heard the street door shut once; it was his new master
going out.  He heard it shut again; it was his predecessor, James
Forster, departing in his turn.  Passepartout remained alone in the
house in Saville Row.




Chapter II

IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT IS CONVINCED THAT HE HAS AT LAST FOUND HIS IDEAL


"Faith," muttered Passepartout, somewhat flurried, "I've seen people at
Madame Tussaud's as lively as my new master!"

Madame Tussaud's "people," let it be said, are of wax, and are much
visited in London; speech is all that is wanting to make them human.

During his brief interview with Mr. Fogg, Passepartout had been
carefully observing him.  He appeared to be a man about forty years of
age, with fine, handsome features, and a tall, well-shaped figure; his
hair and whiskers were light, his forehead compact and unwrinkled, his
face rather pale, his teeth magnificent.  His countenance possessed in
the highest degree what physiognomists call "repose in action," a
quality of those who act rather than talk.  Calm and phlegmatic, with a
clear eye, Mr. Fogg seemed a perfect type of that English composure
which Angelica Kauffmann has so skilfully represented on canvas.  Seen
in the various phases of his daily life, he gave the idea of being
perfectly well-balanced, as exactly regulated as a Leroy chronometer.
Phileas Fogg was, indeed, exactitude personified, and this was betrayed
even in the expression of his very hands and feet; for in men, as well
as in animals, the limbs themselves are expressive of the passions.

He was so exact that he was never in a hurry, was always ready, and was
economical alike of his steps and his motions.  He never took one step
too many, and always went to his destination by the shortest cut; he
made no superfluous gestures, and was never seen to be moved or
agitated.  He was the most deliberate person in the world, yet always
reached his destination at the exact moment.

He lived alone, and, so to speak, outside of every social relation; and
as he knew that in this world account must be taken of friction, and
that friction retards, he never rubbed against anybody.

As for Passepartout, he was a true Parisian of Paris.  Since he had
abandoned his own country for England, taking service as a valet, he
had in vain searched for a master after his own heart.  Passepartout
was by no means one of those pert dunces depicted by Moliere with a
bold gaze and a nose held high in the air; he was an honest fellow,
with a pleasant face, lips a trifle protruding, soft-mannered and
serviceable, with a good round head, such as one likes to see on the
shoulders of a friend.  His eyes were blue, his complexion rubicund,
his figure almost portly and well-built, his body muscular, and his
physical powers fully developed by the exercises of his younger days.
His brown hair was somewhat tumbled; for, while the ancient sculptors
are said to have known eighteen methods of arranging Minerva's tresses,
Passepartout was familiar with but one of dressing his own: three
strokes of a large-tooth comb completed his toilet.

It would be rash to predict how Passepartout's lively nature would
agree with Mr. Fogg.  It was impossible to tell whether the new servant
would turn out as absolutely methodical as his master required;
experience alone could solve the question.  Passepartout had been a
sort of vagrant in his early years, and now yearned for repose; but so
far he had failed to find it, though he had already served in ten
English houses.  But he could not take root in any of these; with
chagrin, he found his masters invariably whimsical and irregular,
constantly running about the country, or on the look-out for adventure.
His last master, young Lord Longferry, Member of Parliament, after
passing his nights in the Haymarket taverns, was too often brought home
in the morning on policemen's shoulders.  Passepartout, desirous of
respecting the gentleman whom he served, ventured a mild remonstrance
on such conduct; which, being ill-received, he took his leave.  Hearing
that Mr. Phileas Fogg was looking for a servant, and that his life was
one of unbroken regularity, that he neither travelled nor stayed from
home overnight, he felt sure that this would be the place he was after.
He presented himself, and was accepted, as has been seen.

At half-past eleven, then, Passepartout found himself alone in the
house in Saville Row.  He began its inspection without delay, scouring
it from cellar to garret.  So clean, well-arranged, solemn a mansion
pleased him; it seemed to him like a snail's shell, lighted and warmed
by gas, which sufficed for both these purposes.  When Passepartout
reached the second story he recognised at once the room which he was to
inhabit, and he was well satisfied with it.  Electric bells and
speaking-tubes afforded communication with the lower stories; while on
the mantel stood an electric clock, precisely like that in Mr. Fogg's
bedchamber, both beating the same second at the same instant.  "That's
good, that'll do," said Passepartout to himself.

He suddenly observed, hung over the clock, a card which, upon
inspection, proved to be a programme of the daily routine of the house.
It comprised all that was required of the servant, from eight in the
morning, exactly at which hour Phileas Fogg rose, till half-past
eleven, when he left the house for the Reform Club--all the details of
service, the tea and toast at twenty-three minutes past eight, the
shaving-water at thirty-seven minutes past nine, and the toilet at
twenty minutes before ten.  Everything was regulated and foreseen that
was to be done from half-past eleven a.m. till midnight, the hour at
which the methodical gentleman retired.

Mr. Fogg's wardrobe was amply supplied and in the best taste.  Each
pair of trousers, coat, and vest bore a number, indicating the time of
year and season at which they were in turn to be laid out for wearing;
and the same system was applied to the master's shoes.  In short, the
house in Saville Row, which must have been a very temple of disorder
and unrest under the illustrious but dissipated Sheridan, was cosiness,
comfort, and method idealised.  There was no study, nor were there
books, which would have been quite useless to Mr. Fogg; for at the
Reform two libraries, one of general literature and the other of law
and politics, were at his service.  A moderate-sized safe stood in his
bedroom, constructed so as to defy fire as well as burglars; but
Passepartout found neither arms nor hunting weapons anywhere;
everything betrayed the most tranquil and peaceable habits.

Having scrutinised the house from top to bottom, he rubbed his hands, a
broad smile overspread his features, and he said joyfully, "This is
just what I wanted!  Ah, we shall get on together, Mr. Fogg and I!
What a domestic and regular gentleman!  A real machine; well, I don't
mind serving a machine."




Chapter III

IN WHICH A CONVERSATION TAKES PLACE WHICH SEEMS LIKELY TO COST PHILEAS
FOGG DEAR


Phileas Fogg, having shut the door of his house at half-past eleven,
and having put his right foot before his left five hundred and
seventy-five times, and his left foot before his right five hundred and
seventy-six times, reached the Reform Club, an imposing edifice in Pall
Mall, which could not have cost less than three millions.  He repaired
at once to the dining-room, the nine windows of which open upon a
tasteful garden, where the trees were already gilded with an autumn
colouring; and took his place at the habitual table, the cover of which
had already been laid for him.  His breakfast consisted of a side-dish,
a broiled fish with Reading sauce, a scarlet slice of roast beef
garnished with mushrooms, a rhubarb and gooseberry tart, and a morsel
of Cheshire cheese, the whole being washed down with several cups of
tea, for which the Reform is famous.  He rose at thirteen minutes to
one, and directed his steps towards the large hall, a sumptuous
apartment adorned with lavishly-framed paintings.  A flunkey handed him
an uncut Times, which he proceeded to cut with a skill which betrayed
familiarity with this delicate operation.  The perusal of this paper
absorbed Phileas Fogg until a quarter before four, whilst the Standard,
his next task, occupied him till the dinner hour.  Dinner passed as
breakfast had done, and Mr. Fogg re-appeared in the reading-room and
sat down to the Pall Mall at twenty minutes before six.  Half an hour
later several members of the Reform came in and drew up to the
fireplace, where a coal fire was steadily burning.  They were Mr.
Fogg's usual partners at whist: Andrew Stuart, an engineer; John
Sullivan and Samuel Fallentin, bankers; Thomas Flanagan, a brewer; and
Gauthier Ralph, one of the Directors of the Bank of England--all rich
and highly respectable personages, even in a club which comprises the
princes of English trade and finance.

"Well, Ralph," said Thomas Flanagan, "what about that robbery?"

"Oh," replied Stuart, "the Bank will lose the money."

"On the contrary," broke in Ralph, "I hope we may put our hands on the
robber.  Skilful detectives have been sent to all the principal ports
of America and the Continent, and he'll be a clever fellow if he slips
through their fingers."

"But have you got the robber's description?" asked Stuart.

"In the first place, he is no robber at all," returned Ralph,
positively.

"What! a fellow who makes off with fifty-five thousand pounds, no
robber?"

"No."

"Perhaps he's a manufacturer, then."

"The Daily Telegraph says that he is a gentleman."

It was Phileas Fogg, whose head now emerged from behind his newspapers,
who made this remark.  He bowed to his friends, and entered into the
conversation.  The affair which formed its subject, and which was town
talk, had occurred three days before at the Bank of England.  A package
of banknotes, to the value of fifty-five thousand pounds, had been
taken from the principal cashier's table, that functionary being at the
moment engaged in registering the receipt of three shillings and
sixpence.  Of course, he could not have his eyes everywhere.  Let it be
observed that the Bank of England reposes a touching confidence in the
honesty of the public.  There are neither guards nor gratings to
protect its treasures; gold, silver, banknotes are freely exposed, at
the mercy of the first comer.  A keen observer of English customs
relates that, being in one of the rooms of the Bank one day, he had the
curiosity to examine a gold ingot weighing some seven or eight pounds.
He took it up, scrutinised it, passed it to his neighbour, he to the
next man, and so on until the ingot, going from hand to hand, was
transferred to the end of a dark entry; nor did it return to its place
for half an hour.  Meanwhile, the cashier had not so much as raised his
head.  But in the present instance things had not gone so smoothly.
The package of notes not being found when five o'clock sounded from the
ponderous clock in the "drawing office," the amount was passed to the
account of profit and loss.  As soon as the robbery was discovered,
picked detectives hastened off to Liverpool, Glasgow, Havre, Suez,
Brindisi, New York, and other ports, inspired by the proffered reward
of two thousand pounds, and five per cent. on the sum that might be
recovered.  Detectives were also charged with narrowly watching those
who arrived at or left London by rail, and a judicial examination was
at once entered upon.

There were real grounds for supposing, as the Daily Telegraph said,
that the thief did not belong to a professional band.  On the day of
the robbery a well-dressed gentleman of polished manners, and with a
well-to-do air, had been observed going to and fro in the paying room
where the crime was committed.  A description of him was easily
procured and sent to the detectives; and some hopeful spirits, of whom
Ralph was one, did not despair of his apprehension.  The papers and
clubs were full of the affair, and everywhere people were discussing
the probabilities of a successful pursuit; and the Reform Club was
especially agitated, several of its members being Bank officials.

Ralph would not concede that the work of the detectives was likely to
be in vain, for he thought that the prize offered would greatly
stimulate their zeal and activity.  But Stuart was far from sharing
this confidence; and, as they placed themselves at the whist-table,
they continued to argue the matter.  Stuart and Flanagan played
together, while Phileas Fogg had Fallentin for his partner.  As the
game proceeded the conversation ceased, excepting between the rubbers,
when it revived again.

"I maintain," said Stuart, "that the chances are in favour of the
thief, who must be a shrewd fellow."

"Well, but where can he fly to?" asked Ralph.  "No country is safe for
him."

"Pshaw!"

"Where could he go, then?"

"Oh, I don't know that.  The world is big enough."

"It was once," said Phileas Fogg, in a low tone.  "Cut, sir," he added,
handing the cards to Thomas Flanagan.

The discussion fell during the rubber, after which Stuart took up its
thread.

"What do you mean by `once'?  Has the world grown smaller?"

"Certainly," returned Ralph.  "I agree with Mr. Fogg.  The world has
grown smaller, since a man can now go round it ten times more quickly
than a hundred years ago.  And that is why the search for this thief
will be more likely to succeed."

"And also why the thief can get away more easily."

"Be so good as to play, Mr. Stuart," said Phileas Fogg.

But the incredulous Stuart was not convinced, and when the hand was
finished, said eagerly: "You have a strange way, Ralph, of proving that
the world has grown smaller.  So, because you can go round it in three
months--"

"In eighty days," interrupted Phileas Fogg.

"That is true, gentlemen," added John Sullivan.  "Only eighty days, now
that the section between Rothal and Allahabad, on the Great Indian
Peninsula Railway, has been opened.  Here is the estimate made by the
Daily Telegraph:

  From London to Suez via Mont Cenis and
    Brindisi, by rail and steamboats .................  7 days
  From Suez to Bombay, by steamer .................... 13  "
  From Bombay to Calcutta, by rail ...................  3  "
  From Calcutta to Hong Kong, by steamer ............. 13  "
  From Hong Kong to Yokohama (Japan), by steamer .....  6  "
  From Yokohama to San Francisco, by steamer ......... 22  "
  From San Francisco to New York, by rail ............. 7  "
  From New York to London, by steamer and rail ........ 9  "
                                                       ------
    Total ............................................ 80 days."

"Yes, in eighty days!" exclaimed Stuart, who in his excitement made a
false deal.  "But that doesn't take into account bad weather, contrary
winds, shipwrecks, railway accidents, and so on."

"All included," returned Phileas Fogg, continuing to play despite the
discussion.

"But suppose the Hindoos or Indians pull up the rails," replied Stuart;
"suppose they stop the trains, pillage the luggage-vans, and scalp the
passengers!"

"All included," calmly retorted Fogg; adding, as he threw down the
cards, "Two trumps."

Stuart, whose turn it was to deal, gathered them up, and went on: "You
are right, theoretically, Mr. Fogg, but practically--"

"Practically also, Mr. Stuart."

"I'd like to see you do it in eighty days."

"It depends on you.  Shall we go?"

"Heaven preserve me!  But I would wager four thousand pounds that such
a journey, made under these conditions, is impossible."

"Quite possible, on the contrary," returned Mr. Fogg.

"Well, make it, then!"

"The journey round the world in eighty days?"

"Yes."

"I should like nothing better."

"When?"

"At once.  Only I warn you that I shall do it at your expense."

"It's absurd!" cried Stuart, who was beginning to be annoyed at the
persistency of his friend.  "Come, let's go on with the game."

"Deal over again, then," said Phileas Fogg.  "There's a false deal."

Stuart took up the pack with a feverish hand; then suddenly put them
down again.

"Well, Mr. Fogg," said he, "it shall be so: I will wager the four
thousand on it."

"Calm yourself, my dear Stuart," said Fallentin.  "It's only a joke."

"When I say I'll wager," returned Stuart, "I mean it."  

"All right," said Mr. Fogg; and, turning to the others, he continued:
"I have a deposit of twenty thousand at Baring's which I will willingly
risk upon it."

"Twenty thousand pounds!" cried Sullivan.  "Twenty thousand pounds,
which you would lose by a single accidental delay!"

"The unforeseen does not exist," quietly replied Phileas Fogg.

"But, Mr. Fogg, eighty days are only the estimate of the least possible
time in which the journey can be made."

"A well-used minimum suffices for everything."

"But, in order not to exceed it, you must jump mathematically from the
trains upon the steamers, and from the steamers upon the trains again."

"I will jump--mathematically."

"You are joking."

"A true Englishman doesn't joke when he is talking about so serious a
thing as a wager," replied Phileas Fogg, solemnly.  "I will bet twenty
thousand pounds against anyone who wishes that I will make the tour of
the world in eighty days or less; in nineteen hundred and twenty hours,
or a hundred and fifteen thousand two hundred minutes.  Do you accept?"

"We accept," replied Messrs. Stuart, Fallentin, Sullivan, Flanagan, and
Ralph, after consulting each other.

"Good," said Mr. Fogg.  "The train leaves for Dover at a quarter before
nine.  I will take it."

"This very evening?" asked Stuart.

"This very evening," returned Phileas Fogg.  He took out and consulted
a pocket almanac, and added,  "As today is Wednesday, the 2nd of
October, I shall be due in London in this very room of the Reform Club,
on Saturday, the 21st of December, at a quarter before nine p.m.; or
else the twenty thousand pounds, now deposited in my name at Baring's,
will belong to you, in fact and in right, gentlemen.  Here is a cheque
for the amount."

A memorandum of the wager was at once drawn up and signed by the six
parties, during which Phileas Fogg preserved a stoical composure.  He
certainly did not bet to win, and had only staked the twenty thousand
pounds, half of his fortune, because he foresaw that he might have to
expend the other half to carry out this difficult, not to say
unattainable, project.  As for his antagonists, they seemed much
agitated; not so much by the value of their stake, as because they had
some scruples about betting under conditions so difficult to their
friend.

The clock struck seven, and the party offered to suspend the game so
that Mr. Fogg might make his preparations for departure.

"I am quite ready now," was his tranquil response.  "Diamonds are
trumps: be so good as to play, gentlemen."




Chapter IV

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG ASTOUNDS PASSEPARTOUT, HIS SERVANT


Having won twenty guineas at whist, and taken leave of his friends,
Phileas Fogg, at twenty-five minutes past seven, left the Reform Club.

Passepartout, who had conscientiously studied the programme of his
duties, was more than surprised to see his master guilty of the
inexactness of appearing at this unaccustomed hour; for, according to
rule, he was not due in Saville Row until precisely midnight.

Mr. Fogg repaired to his bedroom, and called out, "Passepartout!"

Passepartout did not reply.  It could not be he who was called; it was
not the right hour.

"Passepartout!" repeated Mr. Fogg, without raising his voice.

Passepartout made his appearance.

"I've called you twice," observed his master.

"But it is not midnight," responded the other, showing his watch.

"I know it; I don't blame you.  We start for Dover and Calais in ten
minutes."

A puzzled grin overspread Passepartout's round face; clearly he had not
comprehended his master.

"Monsieur is going to leave home?"

"Yes," returned Phileas Fogg.  "We are going round the world."

Passepartout opened wide his eyes, raised his eyebrows, held up his
hands, and seemed about to collapse, so overcome was he with stupefied
astonishment.

"Round the world!" he murmured.

"In eighty days," responded Mr. Fogg.  "So we haven't a moment to lose."

"But the trunks?" gasped Passepartout, unconsciously swaying his head
from right to left.

"We'll have no trunks; only a carpet-bag, with two shirts and three
pairs of stockings for me, and the same for you.  We'll buy our clothes
on the way.  Bring down my mackintosh and traveling-cloak, and some
stout shoes, though we shall do little walking.  Make haste!"

Passepartout tried to reply, but could not.  He went out, mounted to
his own room, fell into a chair, and muttered: "That's good, that is!
And I, who wanted to remain quiet!"

He mechanically set about making the preparations for departure.
Around the world in eighty days!  Was his master a fool?  No.  Was this
a joke, then?  They were going to Dover; good!  To Calais; good again!
After all, Passepartout, who had been away from France five years,
would not be sorry to set foot on his native soil again.  Perhaps they
would go as far as Paris, and it would do his eyes good to see Paris
once more.  But surely a gentleman so chary of his steps would stop
there; no doubt--but, then, it was none the less true that he was
going away, this so domestic person hitherto!

By eight o'clock Passepartout had packed the modest carpet-bag,
containing the wardrobes of his master and himself; then, still
troubled in mind, he carefully shut the door of his room, and descended
to Mr. Fogg.

Mr. Fogg was quite ready.  Under his arm might have been observed a
red-bound copy of Bradshaw's Continental Railway Steam Transit and
General Guide, with its timetables showing the arrival and departure of
steamers and railways.  He took the carpet-bag, opened it, and slipped
into it a goodly roll of Bank of England notes, which would pass
wherever he might go.

"You have forgotten nothing?" asked he.

"Nothing, monsieur."

"My mackintosh and cloak?"

"Here they are."

"Good!  Take this carpet-bag," handing it to Passepartout.  "Take good
care of it, for there are twenty thousand pounds in it."

Passepartout nearly dropped the bag, as if the twenty thousand pounds
were in gold, and weighed him down.

Master and man then descended, the street-door was double-locked, and
at the end of Saville Row they took a cab and drove rapidly to Charing
Cross.  The cab stopped before the railway station at twenty minutes
past eight.  Passepartout jumped off the box and followed his master,
who, after paying the cabman, was about to enter the station, when a
poor beggar-woman, with a child in her arms, her naked feet smeared
with mud, her head covered with a wretched bonnet, from which hung a
tattered feather, and her shoulders shrouded in a ragged shawl,
approached, and mournfully asked for alms.

Mr. Fogg took out the twenty guineas he had just won at whist, and
handed them to the beggar, saying, "Here, my good woman.  I'm glad that
I met you;" and passed on.

Passepartout had a moist sensation about the eyes; his master's action
touched his susceptible heart.

Two first-class tickets for Paris having been speedily purchased, Mr.
Fogg was crossing the station to the train, when he perceived his five
friends of the Reform.

"Well, gentlemen," said he, "I'm off, you see; and, if you will examine
my passport when I get back, you will be able to judge whether I have
accomplished the journey agreed upon."

"Oh, that would be quite unnecessary, Mr. Fogg," said Ralph politely.
"We will trust your word, as a gentleman of honour."

"You do not forget when you are due in London again?"  asked Stuart.

"In eighty days; on Saturday, the 21st of December, 1872, at a quarter
before nine p.m.  Good-bye, gentlemen."

Phileas Fogg and his servant seated themselves in a first-class
carriage at twenty minutes before nine; five minutes later the whistle
screamed, and the train slowly glided out of the station.

The night was dark, and a fine, steady rain was falling.  Phileas Fogg,
snugly ensconced in his corner, did not open his lips.  Passepartout,
not yet recovered from his stupefaction, clung mechanically to the
carpet-bag, with its enormous treasure.

Just as the train was whirling through Sydenham, Passepartout suddenly
uttered a cry of despair.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"Alas!  In my hurry--I--I forgot--"

"What?"

"To turn off the gas in my room!"

"Very well, young man," returned Mr. Fogg, coolly; "it will burn--at
your expense."




Chapter V


IN WHICH A NEW SPECIES OF FUNDS, UNKNOWN TO THE MONEYED MEN, APPEARS ON
'CHANGE


Phileas Fogg rightly suspected that his departure from London would
create a lively sensation at the West End.  The news of the bet spread
through the Reform Club, and afforded an exciting topic of conversation
to its members.  From the club it soon got into the papers throughout
England.  The boasted "tour of the world" was talked about, disputed,
argued with as much warmth as if the subject were another Alabama
claim.  Some took sides with Phileas Fogg, but the large majority shook
their heads and declared against him; it was absurd, impossible, they
declared, that the tour of the world could be made, except
theoretically and on paper, in this minimum of time, and with the
existing means of travelling.  The Times, Standard, Morning Post, and
Daily News, and twenty other highly respectable newspapers scouted Mr.
Fogg's project as madness; the Daily Telegraph alone hesitatingly
supported him.  People in general thought him a lunatic, and blamed his
Reform Club friends for having accepted a wager which betrayed the
mental aberration of its proposer.

Articles no less passionate than logical appeared on the question, for
geography is one of the pet subjects of the English; and the columns
devoted to Phileas Fogg's venture were eagerly devoured by all classes
of readers.  At first some rash individuals, principally of the gentler
sex, espoused his cause, which became still more popular when the
Illustrated London News came out with his portrait, copied from a
photograph in the Reform Club.  A few readers of the Daily Telegraph
even dared to say, "Why not, after all?  Stranger things have come to
pass."

At last a long article appeared, on the 7th of October, in the bulletin
of the Royal Geographical Society, which treated the question from
every point of view, and demonstrated the utter folly of the enterprise.

Everything, it said, was against the travellers, every obstacle imposed
alike by man and by nature.  A miraculous agreement of the times of
departure and arrival, which was impossible, was absolutely necessary
to his success.  He might, perhaps, reckon on the arrival of trains at
the designated hours, in Europe, where the distances were relatively
moderate; but when he calculated upon crossing India in three days, and
the United States in seven, could he rely beyond misgiving upon
accomplishing his task?  There were accidents to machinery, the
liability of trains to run off the line, collisions, bad weather, the
blocking up by snow--were not all these against Phileas Fogg?  Would he
not find himself, when travelling by steamer in winter, at the mercy of
the winds and fogs?  Is it uncommon for the best ocean steamers to be
two or three days behind time?  But a single delay would suffice to
fatally break the chain of communication; should Phileas Fogg once
miss, even by an hour; a steamer, he would have to wait for the next,
and that would irrevocably render his attempt vain.

This article made a great deal of noise, and, being copied into all the
papers, seriously depressed the advocates of the rash tourist.

Everybody knows that England is the world of betting men, who are of a
higher class than mere gamblers; to bet is in the English temperament.
Not only the members of the Reform, but the general public, made heavy
wagers for or against Phileas Fogg, who was set down in the betting
books as if he were a race-horse.  Bonds were issued, and made their
appearance on 'Change; "Phileas Fogg bonds" were offered at par or at a
premium, and a great business was done in them.  But five days after
the article in the bulletin of the Geographical Society appeared, the
demand began to subside:  "Phileas Fogg" declined.  They were offered
by packages, at first of five, then of ten, until at last nobody would
take less than twenty, fifty, a hundred!

Lord Albemarle, an elderly paralytic gentleman, was now the only
advocate of Phileas Fogg left.  This noble lord, who was fastened to
his chair, would have given his fortune to be able to make the tour of
the world, if it took ten years; and he bet five thousand pounds on
Phileas Fogg.  When the folly as well as the uselessness of the
adventure was pointed out to him, he contented himself with replying,
"If the thing is feasible, the first to do it ought to be an
Englishman."

The Fogg party dwindled more and more, everybody was going against him,
and the bets stood a hundred and fifty and two hundred to one; and a
week after his departure an incident occurred which deprived him of
backers at any price.

The commissioner of police was sitting in his office at nine o'clock
one evening, when the following telegraphic dispatch was put into his
hands:

Suez to London.

Rowan, Commissioner of Police, Scotland Yard:

I've found the bank robber, Phileas Fogg.  Send with out delay warrant
of arrest to Bombay.

Fix, Detective.

The effect of this dispatch was instantaneous.  The polished gentleman
disappeared to give place to the bank robber.  His photograph, which
was hung with those of the rest of the members at the Reform Club, was
minutely examined, and it betrayed, feature by feature, the description
of the robber which had been provided to the police.  The mysterious
habits of Phileas Fogg were recalled; his solitary ways, his sudden
departure; and it seemed clear that, in undertaking a tour round the
world on the pretext of a wager, he had had no other end in view than
to elude the detectives, and throw them off his track.




Chapter VI

IN WHICH FIX, THE DETECTIVE, BETRAYS A VERY NATURAL IMPATIENCE


The circumstances under which this telegraphic dispatch about Phileas
Fogg was sent were as follows:

The steamer Mongolia, belonging to the Peninsular and Oriental Company,
built of iron, of two thousand eight hundred tons burden, and five
hundred horse-power, was due at eleven o'clock a.m. on Wednesday, the
9th of October, at Suez.  The Mongolia plied regularly between Brindisi
and Bombay via the Suez Canal, and was one of the fastest steamers
belonging to the company, always making more than ten knots an hour
between Brindisi and Suez, and nine and a half between Suez and Bombay.

Two men were promenading up and down the wharves, among the crowd of
natives and strangers who were sojourning at this once straggling
village--now, thanks to the enterprise of M. Lesseps, a fast-growing
town.  One was the British consul at Suez, who, despite the prophecies
of the English Government, and the unfavourable predictions of
Stephenson, was in the habit of seeing, from his office window, English
ships daily passing to and fro on the great canal, by which the old
roundabout route from England to India by the Cape of Good Hope was
abridged by at least a half.  The other was a small, slight-built
personage, with a nervous, intelligent face, and bright eyes peering
out from under eyebrows which he was incessantly twitching.  He was
just now manifesting unmistakable signs of impatience, nervously pacing
up and down, and unable to stand still for a moment.  This was Fix, one
of the detectives who had been dispatched from England in search of the
bank robber; it was his task to narrowly watch every passenger who
arrived at Suez, and to follow up all who seemed to be suspicious
characters, or bore a resemblance to the description of the criminal,
which he had received two days before from the police headquarters at
London.  The detective was evidently inspired by the hope of obtaining
the splendid reward which would be the prize of success, and awaited
with a feverish impatience, easy to understand, the arrival of the
steamer Mongolia.

"So you say, consul," asked he for the twentieth time, "that this
steamer is never behind time?"

"No, Mr. Fix," replied the consul.  "She was bespoken yesterday at Port
Said, and the rest of the way is of no account to such a craft.  I
repeat that the Mongolia has been in advance of the time required by
the company's regulations, and gained the prize awarded for excess of
speed."

"Does she come directly from Brindisi?"

"Directly from Brindisi; she takes on the Indian mails there, and she
left there Saturday at five p.m.  Have patience, Mr. Fix; she will not
be late.  But really, I don't see how, from the description you have,
you will be able to recognise your man, even if he is on board the
Mongolia."

"A man rather feels the presence of these fellows, consul, than
recognises them.  You must have a scent for them, and a scent is like a
sixth sense which combines hearing, seeing, and smelling.  I've
arrested more than one of these gentlemen in my time, and, if my thief
is on board, I'll answer for it; he'll not slip through my fingers."

"I hope so, Mr. Fix, for it was a heavy robbery."

"A magnificent robbery, consul; fifty-five thousand pounds!  We don't
often have such windfalls.  Burglars are getting to be so contemptible
nowadays!  A fellow gets hung for a handful of shillings!"

"Mr. Fix," said the consul, "I like your way of talking, and hope
you'll succeed; but I fear you will find it far from easy.  Don't you
see, the description which you have there has a singular resemblance to
an honest man?"

"Consul," remarked the detective, dogmatically, "great robbers always
resemble honest folks.  Fellows who have rascally faces have only one
course to take, and that is to remain honest; otherwise they would be
arrested off-hand.  The artistic thing is, to unmask honest
countenances; it's no light task, I admit, but a real art."

Mr. Fix evidently was not wanting in a tinge of self-conceit.

Little by little the scene on the quay became more animated; sailors of
various nations, merchants, ship-brokers, porters, fellahs, bustled to
and fro as if the steamer were immediately expected.  The weather was
clear, and slightly chilly.  The minarets of the town loomed above the
houses in the pale rays of the sun.  A jetty pier, some two thousand
yards along, extended into the roadstead.  A number of fishing-smacks
and coasting boats, some retaining the fantastic fashion of ancient
galleys, were discernible on the Red Sea.

As he passed among the busy crowd, Fix, according to habit, scrutinised
the passers-by with a keen, rapid glance.

It was now half-past ten.

"The steamer doesn't come!" he exclaimed, as the port clock struck.

"She can't be far off now," returned his companion.

"How long will she stop at Suez?"

"Four hours; long enough to get in her coal.  It is thirteen hundred
and ten miles from Suez to Aden, at the other end of the Red Sea, and
she has to take in a fresh coal supply."

"And does she go from Suez directly to Bombay?"

"Without putting in anywhere."

"Good!" said Fix.  "If the robber is on board he will no doubt get off
at Suez, so as to reach the Dutch or French colonies in Asia by some
other route.  He ought to know that he would not be safe an hour in
India, which is English soil."

"Unless," objected the consul, "he is exceptionally shrewd.  An English
criminal, you know, is always better concealed in London than anywhere
else."

This observation furnished the detective food for thought, and
meanwhile the consul went away to his office.  Fix, left alone, was
more impatient than ever, having a presentiment that the robber was on
board the Mongolia.  If he had indeed left London intending to reach
the New World, he would naturally take the route via India, which was
less watched and more difficult to watch than that of the Atlantic.
But Fix's reflections were soon interrupted by a succession of sharp
whistles, which announced the arrival of the Mongolia.  The porters and
fellahs rushed down the quay, and a dozen boats pushed off from the
shore to go and meet the steamer.  Soon her gigantic hull appeared
passing along between the banks, and eleven o'clock struck as she
anchored in the road.  She brought an unusual number of passengers,
some of whom remained on deck to scan the picturesque panorama of the
town, while the greater part disembarked in the boats, and landed on
the quay.

Fix took up a position, and carefully examined each face and figure
which made its appearance.  Presently one of the passengers, after
vigorously pushing his way through the importunate crowd of porters,
came up to him and politely asked if he could point out the English
consulate, at the same time showing a passport which he wished to have
visaed.  Fix instinctively took the passport, and with a rapid glance
read the description of its bearer.  An involuntary motion of surprise
nearly escaped him, for the description in the passport was identical
with that of the bank robber which he had received from Scotland Yard.

"Is this your passport?" asked he.

"No, it's my master's."

"And your master is--"

"He stayed on board."

"But he must go to the consul's in person, so as to establish his
identity."

"Oh, is that necessary?"

"Quite indispensable."

"And where is the consulate?"

"There, on the corner of the square," said Fix, pointing to a house two
hundred steps off.

"I'll go and fetch my master, who won't be much pleased, however, to be
disturbed."

The passenger bowed to Fix, and returned to the steamer.




Chapter VII

WHICH ONCE MORE DEMONSTRATES THE USELESSNESS OF PASSPORTS AS AIDS TO
DETECTIVES


The detective passed down the quay, and rapidly made his way to the
consul's office, where he was at once admitted to the presence of that
official.

"Consul," said he, without preamble, "I have strong reasons for
believing that my man is a passenger on the Mongolia." And he narrated
what had just passed concerning the passport.

"Well, Mr. Fix," replied the consul, "I shall not be sorry to see the
rascal's face; but perhaps he won't come here--that is, if he is the
person you suppose him to be.  A robber doesn't quite like to leave
traces of his flight behind him; and, besides, he is not obliged to
have his passport countersigned."

"If he is as shrewd as I think he is, consul, he will come."

"To have his passport visaed?"

"Yes.  Passports are only good for annoying honest folks, and aiding in
the flight of rogues.  I assure you it will be quite the thing for him
to do; but I hope you will not visa the passport."

"Why not?  If the passport is genuine I have no right to refuse."

"Still, I must keep this man here until I can get a warrant to arrest
him from London."

"Ah, that's your look-out.  But I cannot--"

The consul did not finish his sentence, for as he spoke a knock was
heard at the door, and two strangers entered, one of whom was the
servant whom Fix had met on the quay.  The other, who was his master,
held out his passport with the request that the consul would do him the
favour to visa it.  The consul took the document and carefully read it,
whilst Fix observed, or rather devoured, the stranger with his eyes
from a corner of the room.

"You are Mr. Phileas Fogg?" said the consul, after reading the passport.

"I am."

"And this man is your servant?"

"He is: a Frenchman, named Passepartout."

"You are from London?"

"Yes."

"And you are going--"

"To Bombay."

"Very good, sir.  You know that a visa is useless, and that no passport
is required?"

"I know it, sir," replied Phileas Fogg; "but I wish to prove, by your
visa, that I came by Suez."

"Very well, sir."

The consul proceeded to sign and date the passport, after which he
added his official seal.  Mr. Fogg paid the customary fee, coldly
bowed, and went out, followed by his servant.

"Well?" queried the detective.

"Well, he looks and acts like a perfectly honest man," replied the
consul.

"Possibly; but that is not the question.  Do you think, consul, that
this phlegmatic gentleman resembles, feature by feature, the robber
whose description I have received?"

"I concede that; but then, you know, all descriptions--"

"I'll make certain of it," interrupted Fix.  "The servant seems to me
less mysterious than the master; besides, he's a Frenchman, and can't
help talking.  Excuse me for a little while, consul."

Fix started off in search of Passepartout.

Meanwhile Mr. Fogg, after leaving the consulate, repaired to the quay,
gave some orders to Passepartout, went off to the    Mongolia in a
boat, and descended to his cabin.  He took up his note-book, which
contained the following memoranda:

"Left London, Wednesday, October 2nd, at 8.45 p.m.  "Reached Paris,
Thursday, October 3rd, at 7.20 a.m.  "Left Paris, Thursday, at 8.40
a.m.  "Reached Turin by Mont Cenis, Friday, October 4th, at 6.35 a.m.
"Left Turin, Friday, at 7.20 a.m.  "Arrived at Brindisi, Saturday,
October 5th, at 4 p.m.  "Sailed on the Mongolia, Saturday, at 5 p.m.
"Reached Suez, Wednesday, October 9th, at 11 a.m.  "Total of hours
spent, 158+; or, in days, six days and a half."

These dates were inscribed in an itinerary divided into columns,
indicating the month, the day of the month, and the day for the
stipulated and actual arrivals at each principal point Paris, Brindisi,
Suez, Bombay, Calcutta, Singapore, Hong Kong, Yokohama, San Francisco,
New York, and London--from the 2nd of October to the 21st of December;
and giving a space for setting down the gain made or the loss suffered
on arrival at each locality.  This methodical record thus contained an
account of everything needed, and Mr. Fogg always knew whether he was
behind-hand or in advance of his time.  On this Friday, October 9th, he
noted his arrival at Suez, and observed that he had as yet neither
gained nor lost.  He sat down quietly to breakfast in his cabin, never
once thinking of inspecting the town, being one of those Englishmen who
are wont to see foreign countries through the eyes of their domestics.




Chapter VIII

IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT TALKS RATHER MORE, PERHAPS, THAN IS PRUDENT


Fix soon rejoined Passepartout, who was lounging and looking about on
the quay, as if he did not feel that he, at least, was obliged not to
see anything.

"Well, my friend," said the detective, coming up with him, "is your
passport visaed?"

"Ah, it's you, is it, monsieur?" responded Passepartout.  "Thanks, yes,
the passport is all right."

"And you are looking about you?"

"Yes; but we travel so fast that I seem to be journeying in a dream.
So this is Suez?"

"Yes."

"In Egypt?"

"Certainly, in Egypt."

"And in Africa?"

"In Africa."

"In Africa!" repeated Passepartout.  "Just think, monsieur, I had no
idea that we should go farther than Paris; and all that I saw of Paris
was between twenty minutes past seven and twenty minutes before nine in
the morning, between the Northern and the Lyons stations, through the
windows of a car, and in a driving rain!  How I regret not having seen
once more Pere la Chaise and the circus in the Champs Elysees!"

"You are in a great hurry, then?"

"I am not, but my master is.  By the way, I must buy some shoes and
shirts.  We came away without trunks, only with a carpet-bag."

"I will show you an excellent shop for getting what you want."

"Really, monsieur, you are very kind."

And they walked off together, Passepartout chatting volubly as they
went along.

"Above all," said he; "don't let me lose the steamer."

"You have plenty of time; it's only twelve o'clock."

Passepartout pulled out his big watch.  "Twelve!" he exclaimed; "why,
it's only eight minutes before ten."

"Your watch is slow."

"My watch?  A family watch, monsieur, which has come down from my
great-grandfather!  It doesn't vary five minutes in the year.  It's a
perfect chronometer, look you."

"I see how it is," said Fix.  "You have kept London time, which is two
hours behind that of Suez.  You ought to regulate your watch at noon in
each country."

"I regulate my watch?  Never!"

"Well, then, it will not agree with the sun."

"So much the worse for the sun, monsieur.  The sun will be wrong, then!"

And the worthy fellow returned the watch to its fob with a defiant
gesture.  After a few minutes silence, Fix resumed: "You left London
hastily, then?"

"I rather think so!  Last Friday at eight o'clock in the evening,
Monsieur Fogg came home from his club, and three-quarters of an hour
afterwards we were off."

"But where is your master going?"

"Always straight ahead.  He is going round the world."

"Round the world?" cried Fix.

"Yes, and in eighty days!  He says it is on a wager; but, between us, I
don't believe a word of it.  That wouldn't be common sense.  There's
something else in the wind."

"Ah!  Mr. Fogg is a character, is he?"

"I should say he was."

"Is he rich?"

"No doubt, for he is carrying an enormous sum in brand new banknotes
with him.  And he doesn't spare the money on the way, either: he has
offered a large reward to the engineer of the Mongolia if he gets us to
Bombay well in advance of time."

"And you have known your master a long time?"

"Why, no; I entered his service the very day we left London."

The effect of these replies upon the already suspicious and excited
detective may be imagined.  The hasty departure from London soon after
the robbery; the large sum carried by Mr. Fogg; his eagerness to reach
distant countries; the pretext of an eccentric and foolhardy bet--all
confirmed Fix in his theory.  He continued to pump poor Passepartout,
and learned that he really knew little or nothing of his master, who
lived a solitary existence in London, was said to be rich, though no
one knew whence came his riches, and was mysterious and impenetrable in
his affairs and habits.  Fix felt sure that Phileas Fogg would not land
at Suez, but was really going on to Bombay.

"Is Bombay far from here?" asked Passepartout.

"Pretty far.  It is a ten days' voyage by sea."

"And in what country is Bombay?"

"India."

"In Asia?"

"Certainly."

"The deuce!  I was going to tell you there's one thing that worries
me--my burner!"

"What burner?"

"My gas-burner, which I forgot to turn off, and which is at this moment
burning at my expense.  I have calculated, monsieur, that I lose two
shillings every four and twenty hours, exactly sixpence more than I
earn; and you will understand that the longer our journey--"

Did Fix pay any attention to Passepartout's trouble about the gas?  It
is not probable.  He was not listening, but was cogitating a project.
Passepartout and he had now reached the shop, where Fix left his
companion to make his purchases, after recommending him not to miss the
steamer, and hurried back to the consulate.  Now that he was fully
convinced, Fix had quite recovered his equanimity.

"Consul," said he, "I have no longer any doubt.  I have spotted my man.
He passes himself off as an odd stick who is going round the world in
eighty days."

"Then he's a sharp fellow," returned the consul, "and counts on
returning to London after putting the police of the two countries off
his track."

"We'll see about that," replied Fix.

"But are you not mistaken?"

"I am not mistaken."

"Why was this robber so anxious to prove, by the visa, that he had
passed through Suez?"

"Why?  I have no idea; but listen to me."

He reported in a few words the most important parts of his conversation
with Passepartout.

"In short," said the consul, "appearances are wholly against this man.
And what are you going to do?"

"Send a dispatch to London for a warrant of arrest to be dispatched
instantly to Bombay, take passage on board the Mongolia, follow my
rogue to India, and there, on English ground, arrest him politely, with
my warrant in my hand, and my hand on his shoulder."

Having uttered these words with a cool, careless air, the detective
took leave of the consul, and repaired to the telegraph office, whence
he sent the dispatch which we have seen to the London police office.  A
quarter of an hour later found Fix, with a small bag in his hand,
proceeding on board the Mongolia; and, ere many moments longer, the
noble steamer rode out at full steam upon the waters of the Red Sea.




Chapter IX

IN WHICH THE RED SEA AND THE INDIAN OCEAN PROVE PROPITIOUS TO THE
DESIGNS OF PHILEAS FOGG


The distance between Suez and Aden is precisely thirteen hundred and
ten miles, and the regulations of the company allow the steamers one
hundred and thirty-eight hours in which to traverse it.  The Mongolia,
thanks to the vigorous exertions of the engineer, seemed likely, so
rapid was her speed, to reach her destination considerably within that
time.  The greater part of the passengers from Brindisi were bound for
India some for Bombay, others for Calcutta by way of Bombay, the
nearest route thither, now that a railway crosses the Indian peninsula.
Among the passengers was a number of officials and military officers of
various grades, the latter being either attached to the regular British
forces or commanding the Sepoy troops, and receiving high salaries ever
since the central government has assumed the powers of the East India
Company: for the sub-lieutenants get 280 pounds, brigadiers, 2,400
pounds, and generals of divisions, 4,000 pounds.  What with the
military men, a number of rich young Englishmen on their travels, and
the hospitable efforts of the purser, the time passed quickly on the
Mongolia.  The best of fare was spread upon the cabin tables at
breakfast, lunch, dinner, and the eight o'clock supper, and the ladies
scrupulously changed their toilets twice a day; and the hours were
whirled away, when the sea was tranquil, with music, dancing, and games.

But the Red Sea is full of caprice, and often boisterous, like most
long and narrow gulfs.  When the wind came from the African or Asian
coast the Mongolia, with her long hull, rolled fearfully.  Then the
ladies speedily disappeared below; the pianos were silent; singing and
dancing suddenly ceased.  Yet the good ship ploughed straight on,
unretarded by wind or wave, towards the straits of Bab-el-Mandeb.  What
was Phileas Fogg doing all this time?  It might be thought that, in his
anxiety, he would be constantly watching the changes of the wind, the
disorderly raging of the billows--every chance, in short, which might
force the Mongolia to slacken her speed, and thus interrupt his
journey.  But, if he thought of these possibilities, he did not betray
the fact by any outward sign.

Always the same impassible member of the Reform Club, whom no incident
could surprise, as unvarying as the ship's chronometers, and seldom
having the curiosity even to go upon the deck, he passed through the
memorable scenes of the Red Sea with cold indifference; did not care to
recognise the historic towns and villages which, along its borders,
raised their picturesque outlines against the sky; and betrayed no fear
of the dangers of the Arabic Gulf, which the old historians always
spoke of with horror, and upon which the ancient navigators never
ventured without propitiating the gods by ample sacrifices.  How did
this eccentric personage pass his time on the Mongolia?  He made his
four hearty meals every day, regardless of the most persistent rolling
and pitching on the part of the steamer; and he played whist
indefatigably, for he had found partners as enthusiastic in the game as
himself.  A tax-collector, on the way to his post at Goa; the Rev.
Decimus Smith, returning to his parish at Bombay; and a
brigadier-general of the English army, who was about to rejoin his
brigade at Benares, made up the party, and, with Mr. Fogg, played whist
by the hour together in absorbing silence.

As for Passepartout, he, too, had escaped sea-sickness, and took his
meals conscientiously in the forward cabin.  He rather enjoyed the
voyage, for he was well fed and well lodged, took a great interest in
the scenes through which they were passing, and consoled himself with
the delusion that his master's whim would end at Bombay.  He was
pleased, on the day after leaving Suez, to find on deck the obliging
person with whom he had walked and chatted on the quays.

"If I am not mistaken," said he, approaching this person, with his most
amiable smile, "you are the gentleman who so kindly volunteered to
guide me at Suez?"

"Ah!  I quite recognise you.  You are the servant of the strange
Englishman--"

"Just so, monsieur--"

"Fix."

"Monsieur Fix," resumed Passepartout, "I'm charmed to find you on
board.  Where are you bound?"

"Like you, to Bombay."

"That's capital!  Have you made this trip before?"

"Several times.  I am one of the agents of the Peninsular Company."

"Then you know India?"

"Why yes," replied Fix, who spoke cautiously.

"A curious place, this India?"

"Oh, very curious.  Mosques, minarets, temples, fakirs, pagodas,
tigers, snakes, elephants!  I hope you will have ample time to see the
sights."

"I hope so, Monsieur Fix.  You see, a man of sound sense ought not to
spend his life jumping from a steamer upon a railway train, and from a
railway train upon a steamer again, pretending to make the tour of the
world in eighty days!  No; all these gymnastics, you may be sure, will
cease at Bombay."

"And Mr. Fogg is getting on well?" asked Fix, in the most natural tone
in the world.

"Quite well, and I too.  I eat like a famished ogre; it's the sea air."

"But I never see your master on deck."

"Never; he hasn't the least curiosity."

"Do you know, Mr. Passepartout, that this pretended tour in eighty days
may conceal some secret errand--perhaps a diplomatic mission?"

"Faith, Monsieur Fix, I assure you I know nothing about it, nor would I
give half a crown to find out."

After this meeting, Passepartout and Fix got into the habit of chatting
together, the latter making it a point to gain the worthy man's
confidence.  He frequently offered him a glass of whiskey or pale ale
in the steamer bar-room, which Passepartout never failed to accept with
graceful alacrity, mentally pronouncing Fix the best of good fellows.

Meanwhile the Mongolia was pushing forward rapidly; on the 13th, Mocha,
surrounded by its ruined walls whereon date-trees were growing, was
sighted, and on the mountains beyond were espied vast coffee-fields.
Passepartout was ravished to behold this celebrated place, and thought
that, with its circular walls and dismantled fort, it looked like an
immense coffee-cup and saucer. The following night they passed through
the Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb, which means in Arabic The Bridge of Tears,
and the next day they put in at Steamer Point, north-west of Aden
harbour, to take in coal.  This matter of fuelling steamers is a
serious one at such distances from the coal-mines; it costs the
Peninsular Company some eight hundred thousand pounds a year.  In these
distant seas, coal is worth three or four pounds sterling a ton.

The Mongolia had still sixteen hundred and fifty miles to traverse
before reaching Bombay, and was obliged to remain four hours at Steamer
Point to coal up.  But this delay, as it was foreseen, did not affect
Phileas Fogg's programme; besides, the Mongolia, instead of reaching
Aden on the morning of the 15th, when she was due, arrived there on the
evening of the 14th, a gain of fifteen hours.

Mr. Fogg and his servant went ashore at Aden to have the passport again
visaed; Fix, unobserved, followed them.  The visa procured, Mr. Fogg
returned on board to resume his former habits; while Passepartout,
according to custom, sauntered about among the mixed population of
Somalis, Banyans, Parsees, Jews, Arabs, and Europeans who comprise the
twenty-five thousand inhabitants of Aden.  He gazed with wonder upon
the fortifications which make this place the Gibraltar of the Indian
Ocean, and the vast cisterns where the English engineers were still at
work, two thousand years after the engineers of Solomon.

"Very curious, very curious," said Passepartout to himself, on
returning to the steamer.  "I see that it is by no means useless to
travel, if a man wants to see something new."  At six p.m.  the
Mongolia slowly moved out of the roadstead, and was soon once more on
the Indian Ocean.  She had a hundred and sixty-eight hours in which to
reach Bombay, and the sea was favourable, the wind being in the
north-west, and all sails aiding the engine.  The steamer rolled but
little, the ladies, in fresh toilets, reappeared on deck, and the
singing and dancing were resumed.  The trip was being accomplished most
successfully, and Passepartout was enchanted with the congenial
companion which chance had secured him in the person of the delightful
Fix.  On Sunday, October 20th, towards noon, they came in sight of the
Indian coast: two hours later the pilot came on board.  A range of
hills lay against the sky in the horizon, and soon the rows of palms
which adorn Bombay came distinctly into view.  The steamer entered the
road formed by the islands in the bay, and at half-past four she hauled
up at the quays of Bombay.

Phileas Fogg was in the act of finishing the thirty-third rubber of the
voyage, and his partner and himself having, by a bold stroke, captured
all thirteen of the tricks, concluded this fine campaign with a
brilliant victory.

The Mongolia was due at Bombay on the 22nd; she arrived on the 20th.
This was a gain to Phileas Fogg of two days since his departure from
London, and he calmly entered the fact in the itinerary, in the column
of gains.




Chapter X

IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT IS ONLY TOO GLAD TO GET OFF WITH THE LOSS OF HIS
SHOES


Everybody knows that the great reversed triangle of land, with its base
in the north and its apex in the south, which is called India, embraces
fourteen hundred thousand square miles, upon which is spread unequally
a population of one hundred and eighty millions of souls.  The British
Crown exercises a real and despotic dominion over the larger portion of
this vast country, and has a governor-general stationed at Calcutta,
governors at Madras, Bombay, and in Bengal, and a lieutenant-governor
at Agra.

But British India, properly so called, only embraces seven hundred
thousand square miles, and a population of from one hundred to one
hundred and ten millions of inhabitants.  A considerable portion of
India is still free from British authority; and there are certain
ferocious rajahs in the interior who are absolutely independent.  The
celebrated East India Company was all-powerful from 1756, when the
English first gained a foothold on the spot where now stands the city
of Madras, down to the time of the great Sepoy insurrection.  It
gradually annexed province after province, purchasing them of the
native chiefs, whom it seldom paid, and appointed the governor-general
and his subordinates, civil and military.  But the East India Company
has now passed away, leaving the British possessions in India directly
under the control of the Crown.  The aspect of the country, as well as
the manners and distinctions of race, is daily changing.

Formerly one was obliged to travel in India by the old cumbrous methods
of going on foot or on horseback, in palanquins or unwieldy coaches;
now fast steamboats ply on the Indus and the Ganges, and a great
railway, with branch lines joining the main line at many points on its
route, traverses the peninsula from Bombay to Calcutta in three days.
This railway does not run in a direct line across India.  The distance
between Bombay and Calcutta, as the bird flies, is only from one
thousand to eleven hundred miles; but the deflections of the road
increase this distance by more than a third.

The general route of the Great Indian Peninsula Railway is as follows:
Leaving Bombay, it passes through Salcette, crossing to the continent
opposite Tannah, goes over the chain of the Western Ghauts, runs thence
north-east as far as Burhampoor, skirts the nearly independent
territory of Bundelcund, ascends to Allahabad, turns thence eastwardly,
meeting the Ganges at Benares, then departs from the river a little,
and, descending south-eastward by Burdivan and the French town of
Chandernagor, has its terminus at Calcutta.

The passengers of the Mongolia went ashore at half-past four p.m.; at
exactly eight the train would start for Calcutta.

Mr. Fogg, after bidding good-bye to his whist partners, left the
steamer, gave his servant several errands to do, urged it upon him to
be at the station promptly at eight, and, with his regular step, which
beat to the second, like an astronomical clock, directed his steps to
the passport office.  As for the wonders of Bombay--its famous city
hall, its splendid library, its forts and docks, its bazaars, mosques,
synagogues, its Armenian churches, and the noble pagoda on Malabar
Hill, with its two polygonal towers--he cared not a straw to see them.
He would not deign to examine even the masterpieces of Elephanta, or
the mysterious hypogea, concealed south-east from the docks, or those
fine remains of Buddhist architecture, the Kanherian grottoes of the
island of Salcette.

Having transacted his business at the passport office, Phileas Fogg
repaired quietly to the railway station, where he ordered dinner.
Among the dishes served up to him, the landlord especially recommended
a certain giblet of "native rabbit," on which he prided himself.

Mr. Fogg accordingly tasted the dish, but, despite its spiced sauce,
found it far from palatable.  He rang for the landlord, and, on his
appearance, said, fixing his clear eyes upon him, "Is this rabbit, sir?"

"Yes, my lord," the rogue boldly replied, "rabbit from the jungles."

"And this rabbit did not mew when he was killed?"

"Mew, my lord!  What, a rabbit mew!  I swear to you--"

"Be so good, landlord, as not to swear, but remember this: cats were
formerly considered, in India, as sacred animals.  That was a good
time."

"For the cats, my lord?"

"Perhaps for the travellers as well!"

After which Mr. Fogg quietly continued his dinner.  Fix had gone on
shore shortly after Mr. Fogg, and his first destination was the
headquarters of the Bombay police.  He made himself known as a London
detective, told his business at Bombay, and the position of affairs
relative to the supposed robber, and nervously asked if a warrant had
arrived from London.  It had not reached the office; indeed, there had
not yet been time for it to arrive.  Fix was sorely disappointed, and
tried to obtain an order of arrest from the director of the Bombay
police.  This the director refused, as the matter concerned the London
office, which alone could legally deliver the warrant.  Fix did not
insist, and was fain to resign himself to await the arrival of the
important document; but he was determined not to lose sight of the
mysterious rogue as long as he stayed in Bombay.  He did not doubt for
a moment, any more than Passepartout, that Phileas Fogg would remain
there, at least until it was time for the warrant to arrive.

Passepartout, however, had no sooner heard his master's orders on
leaving the Mongolia than he saw at once that they were to leave Bombay
as they had done Suez and Paris, and that the journey would be extended
at least as far as Calcutta, and perhaps beyond that place.  He began
to ask himself if this bet that Mr. Fogg talked about was not really in
good earnest, and whether his fate was not in truth forcing him,
despite his love of repose, around the world in eighty days!

Having purchased the usual quota of shirts and shoes, he took a
leisurely promenade about the streets, where crowds of people of many
nationalities--Europeans, Persians with pointed caps, Banyas with round
turbans, Sindes with square bonnets, Parsees with black mitres, and
long-robed Armenians--were collected.  It happened to be the day of a
Parsee festival.  These descendants of the sect of Zoroaster--the most
thrifty, civilised, intelligent, and austere of the East Indians, among
whom are counted the richest native merchants of Bombay--were
celebrating a sort of religious carnival, with processions and shows,
in the midst of which Indian dancing-girls, clothed in rose-coloured
gauze, looped up with gold and silver, danced airily, but with perfect
modesty, to the sound of viols and the clanging of tambourines.  It is
needless to say that Passepartout watched these curious ceremonies with
staring eyes and gaping mouth, and that his countenance was that of the
greenest booby imaginable.

Unhappily for his master, as well as himself, his curiosity drew him
unconsciously farther off than he intended to go.  At last, having seen
the Parsee carnival wind away in the distance, he was turning his steps
towards the station, when he happened to espy the splendid pagoda on
Malabar Hill, and was seized with an irresistible desire to see its
interior.  He was quite ignorant that it is forbidden to Christians to
enter certain Indian temples, and that even the faithful must not go in
without first leaving their shoes outside the door.  It may be said
here that the wise policy of the British Government severely punishes a
disregard of the practices of the native religions.

Passepartout, however, thinking no harm, went in like a simple tourist,
and was soon lost in admiration of the splendid Brahmin ornamentation
which everywhere met his eyes, when of a sudden he found himself
sprawling on the sacred flagging.  He looked up to behold three enraged
priests, who forthwith fell upon him; tore off his shoes, and began to
beat him with loud, savage exclamations.  The agile Frenchman was soon
upon his feet again, and lost no time in knocking down two of his
long-gowned adversaries with his fists and a vigorous application of
his toes; then, rushing out of the pagoda as fast as his legs could
carry him, he soon escaped the third priest by mingling with the crowd
in the streets.

At five minutes before eight, Passepartout, hatless, shoeless, and
having in the squabble lost his package of shirts and shoes, rushed
breathlessly into the station.

Fix, who had followed Mr. Fogg to the station, and saw that he was
really going to leave Bombay, was there, upon the platform.  He had
resolved to follow the supposed robber to Calcutta, and farther, if
necessary.  Passepartout did not observe the detective, who stood in an
obscure corner; but Fix heard him relate his adventures in a few words
to Mr. Fogg.

"I hope that this will not happen again," said Phileas Fogg coldly, as
he got into the train.  Poor Passepartout, quite crestfallen, followed
his master without a word.  Fix was on the point of entering another
carriage, when an idea struck him which induced him to alter his plan.

"No, I'll stay," muttered he.  "An offence has been committed on Indian
soil.  I've got my man."

Just then the locomotive gave a sharp screech, and the train passed out
into the darkness of the night.




Chapter XI

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SECURES A CURIOUS MEANS OF CONVEYANCE AT A
FABULOUS PRICE


The train had started punctually.  Among the passengers were a number
of officers, Government officials, and opium and indigo merchants,
whose business called them to the eastern coast.  Passepartout rode in
the same carriage with his master, and a third passenger occupied a
seat opposite to them.  This was Sir Francis Cromarty, one of Mr.
Fogg's whist partners on the Mongolia, now on his way to join his corps
at Benares.  Sir Francis was a tall, fair man of fifty, who had greatly
distinguished himself in the last Sepoy revolt.  He made India his
home, only paying brief visits to England at rare intervals; and was
almost as familiar as a native with the customs, history, and character
of India and its people.  But Phileas Fogg, who was not travelling, but
only describing a circumference, took no pains to inquire into these
subjects; he was a solid body, traversing an orbit around the
terrestrial globe, according to the laws of rational mechanics.  He was
at this moment calculating in his mind the number of hours spent since
his departure from London, and, had it been in his nature to make a
useless demonstration, would have rubbed his hands for satisfaction.
Sir Francis Cromarty had observed the oddity of his travelling
companion--although the only opportunity he had for studying him had
been while he was dealing the cards, and between two rubbers--and
questioned himself whether a human heart really beat beneath this cold
exterior, and whether Phileas Fogg had any sense of the beauties of
nature.  The brigadier-general was free to mentally confess that, of
all the eccentric persons he had ever met, none was comparable to this
product of the exact sciences.

Phileas Fogg had not concealed from Sir Francis his design of going
round the world, nor the circumstances under which he set out; and the
general only saw in the wager a useless eccentricity and a lack of
sound common sense.  In the way this strange gentleman was going on, he
would leave the world without having done any good to himself or
anybody else.

An hour after leaving Bombay the train had passed the viaducts and the
Island of Salcette, and had got into the open country.  At Callyan they
reached the junction of the branch line which descends towards
south-eastern India by Kandallah and Pounah; and, passing Pauwell, they
entered the defiles of the mountains, with their basalt bases, and
their summits crowned with thick and verdant forests.  Phileas Fogg and
Sir Francis Cromarty exchanged a few words from time to time, and now
Sir Francis, reviving the conversation, observed, "Some years ago, Mr.
Fogg, you would have met with a delay at this point which would
probably have lost you your wager."

"How so, Sir Francis?"

"Because the railway stopped at the base of these mountains, which the
passengers were obliged to cross in palanquins or on ponies to
Kandallah, on the other side."

"Such a delay would not have deranged my plans in the least," said Mr.
Fogg.  "I have constantly foreseen the likelihood of certain obstacles."

"But, Mr. Fogg," pursued Sir Francis, "you run the risk of having some
difficulty about this worthy fellow's adventure at the pagoda."
Passepartout, his feet comfortably wrapped in his travelling-blanket,
was sound asleep and did not dream that anybody was talking about him.
"The Government is very severe upon that kind of offence.  It takes
particular care that the religious customs of the Indians should be
respected, and if your servant were caught--"

"Very well, Sir Francis," replied Mr. Fogg; "if he had been caught he
would have been condemned and punished, and then would have quietly
returned to Europe.  I don't see how this affair could have delayed his
master."

The conversation fell again.  During the night the train left the
mountains behind, and passed Nassik, and the next day proceeded over
the flat, well-cultivated country of the Khandeish, with its straggling
villages, above which rose the minarets of the pagodas.  This fertile
territory is watered by numerous small rivers and limpid streams,
mostly tributaries of the Godavery.

Passepartout, on waking and looking out, could not realise that he was
actually crossing India in a railway train.  The locomotive, guided by
an English engineer and fed with English coal, threw out its smoke upon
cotton, coffee, nutmeg, clove, and pepper plantations, while the steam
curled in spirals around groups of palm-trees, in the midst of which
were seen picturesque bungalows, viharis (sort of abandoned
monasteries), and marvellous temples enriched by the exhaustless
ornamentation of Indian architecture.  Then they came upon vast tracts
extending to the horizon, with jungles inhabited by snakes and tigers,
which fled at the noise of the train; succeeded by forests penetrated
by the railway, and still haunted by elephants which, with pensive
eyes, gazed at the train as it passed.  The travellers crossed, beyond
Milligaum, the fatal country so often stained with blood by the
sectaries of the goddess Kali.  Not far off rose Ellora, with its
graceful pagodas, and the famous Aurungabad, capital of the ferocious
Aureng-Zeb, now the chief town of one of the detached provinces of the
kingdom of the Nizam.  It was thereabouts that Feringhea, the Thuggee
chief, king of the stranglers, held his sway.  These ruffians, united
by a secret bond, strangled victims of every age in honour of the
goddess Death, without ever shedding blood; there was a period when
this part of the country could scarcely be travelled over without
corpses being found in every direction.  The English Government has
succeeded in greatly diminishing these murders, though the Thuggees
still exist, and pursue the exercise of their horrible rites.

At half-past twelve the train stopped at Burhampoor where Passepartout
was able to purchase some Indian slippers, ornamented with false
pearls, in which, with evident vanity, he proceeded to encase his feet.
The travellers made a hasty breakfast and started off for Assurghur,
after skirting for a little the banks of the small river Tapty, which
empties into the Gulf of Cambray, near Surat.

Passepartout was now plunged into absorbing reverie.  Up to his arrival
at Bombay, he had entertained hopes that their journey would end there;
but, now that they were plainly whirling across India at full speed, a
sudden change had come over the spirit of his dreams.  His old vagabond
nature returned to him; the fantastic ideas of his youth once more took
possession of him.  He came to regard his master's project as intended
in good earnest, believed in the reality of the bet, and therefore in
the tour of the world and the necessity of making it without fail
within the designated period.  Already he began to worry about possible
delays, and accidents which might happen on the way.  He recognised
himself as being personally interested in the wager, and trembled at
the thought that he might have been the means of losing it by his
unpardonable folly of the night before.  Being much less cool-headed
than Mr. Fogg, he was much more restless, counting and recounting the
days passed over, uttering maledictions when the train stopped, and
accusing it of sluggishness, and mentally blaming Mr. Fogg for not
having bribed the engineer.  The worthy fellow was ignorant that, while
it was possible by such means to hasten the rate of a steamer, it could
not be done on the railway.

The train entered the defiles of the Sutpour Mountains, which separate
the Khandeish from Bundelcund, towards evening.  The next day Sir
Francis Cromarty asked Passepartout what time it was; to which, on
consulting his watch, he replied that it was three in the morning.
This famous timepiece, always regulated on the Greenwich meridian,
which was now some seventy-seven degrees westward, was at least four
hours slow.  Sir Francis corrected Passepartout's time, whereupon the
latter made the same remark that he had done to Fix; and upon the
general insisting that the watch should be regulated in each new
meridian, since he was constantly going eastward, that is in the face
of the sun, and therefore the days were shorter by four minutes for
each degree gone over, Passepartout obstinately refused to alter his
watch, which he kept at London time.  It was an innocent delusion which
could harm no one.

The train stopped, at eight o'clock, in the midst of a glade some
fifteen miles beyond Rothal, where there were several bungalows, and
workmen's cabins.  The conductor, passing along the carriages, shouted,
"Passengers will get out here!"

Phileas Fogg looked at Sir Francis Cromarty for an explanation; but the
general could not tell what meant a halt in the midst of this forest of
dates and acacias.

Passepartout, not less surprised, rushed out and speedily returned,
crying: "Monsieur, no more railway!"

"What do you mean?" asked Sir Francis.

"I mean to say that the train isn't going on."

The general at once stepped out, while Phileas Fogg calmly followed
him, and they proceeded together to the conductor.

"Where are we?" asked Sir Francis.

"At the hamlet of Kholby."

"Do we stop here?"

"Certainly.  The railway isn't finished."

"What! not finished?"

"No.  There's still a matter of fifty miles to be laid from here to
Allahabad, where the line begins again."

"But the papers announced the opening of the railway throughout."

"What would you have, officer?  The papers were mistaken."

"Yet you sell tickets from Bombay to Calcutta," retorted Sir Francis,
who was growing warm.

"No doubt," replied the conductor; "but the passengers know that they
must provide means of transportation for themselves from Kholby to
Allahabad."

Sir Francis was furious.  Passepartout would willingly have knocked the
conductor down, and did not dare to look at his master.

"Sir Francis," said Mr. Fogg quietly, "we will, if you please, look
about for some means of conveyance to Allahabad."

"Mr. Fogg, this is a delay greatly to your disadvantage."

"No, Sir Francis; it was foreseen."

"What!  You knew that the way--"

"Not at all; but I knew that some obstacle or other would sooner or
later arise on my route.  Nothing, therefore, is lost. I have two days,
which I have already gained, to sacrifice.  A steamer leaves Calcutta
for Hong Kong at noon, on the 25th.  This is the 22nd, and we shall
reach Calcutta in time."

There was nothing to say to so confident a response.

It was but too true that the railway came to a termination at this
point.  The papers were like some watches, which have a way of getting
too fast, and had been premature in their announcement of the
completion of the line.  The greater part of the travellers were aware
of this interruption, and, leaving the train, they began to engage such
vehicles as the village could provide four-wheeled palkigharis, waggons
drawn by zebus, carriages that looked like perambulating pagodas,
palanquins, ponies, and what not.

Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis Cromarty, after searching the village from end
to end, came back without having found anything.

"I shall go afoot," said Phileas Fogg.

Passepartout, who had now rejoined his master, made a wry grimace, as
he thought of his magnificent, but too frail Indian shoes.  Happily he
too had been looking about him, and, after a moment's hesitation, said,
"Monsieur, I think I have found a means of conveyance."

"What?"

"An elephant!  An elephant that belongs to an Indian who lives but a
hundred steps from here."

"Let's go and see the elephant," replied Mr. Fogg.

They soon reached a small hut, near which, enclosed within some high
palings, was the animal in question.  An Indian came out of the hut,
and, at their request, conducted them within the enclosure.  The
elephant, which its owner had reared, not for a beast of burden, but
for warlike purposes, was half domesticated.  The Indian had begun
already, by often irritating him, and feeding him every three months on
sugar and butter, to impart to him a ferocity not in his nature, this
method being often employed by those who train the Indian elephants for
battle.  Happily, however, for Mr. Fogg, the animal's instruction in
this direction had not gone far, and the elephant still preserved his
natural gentleness.  Kiouni--this was the name of the beast--could
doubtless travel rapidly for a long time, and, in default of any other
means of conveyance, Mr. Fogg resolved to hire him.  But elephants are
far from cheap in India, where they are becoming scarce, the males,
which alone are suitable for circus shows, are much sought, especially
as but few of them are domesticated.  When therefore Mr. Fogg proposed
to the Indian to hire Kiouni, he refused point-blank.  Mr. Fogg
persisted, offering the excessive sum of ten pounds an hour for the
loan of the beast to Allahabad.  Refused.  Twenty pounds?  Refused
also.  Forty pounds?  Still refused.  Passepartout jumped at each
advance; but the Indian declined to be tempted.  Yet the offer was an
alluring one, for, supposing it took the elephant fifteen hours to
reach Allahabad, his owner would receive no less than six hundred
pounds sterling.

Phileas Fogg, without getting in the least flurried, then proposed to
purchase the animal outright, and at first offered a thousand pounds
for him.  The Indian, perhaps thinking he was going to make a great
bargain, still refused.

Sir Francis Cromarty took Mr. Fogg aside, and begged him to reflect
before he went any further; to which that gentleman replied that he was
not in the habit of acting rashly, that a bet of twenty thousand pounds
was at stake, that the elephant was absolutely necessary to him, and
that he would secure him if he had to pay twenty times his value.
Returning to the Indian, whose small, sharp eyes, glistening with
avarice, betrayed that with him it was only a question of how great a
price he could obtain.  Mr. Fogg offered first twelve hundred, then
fifteen hundred, eighteen hundred, two thousand pounds.  Passepartout,
usually so rubicund, was fairly white with suspense.

At two thousand pounds the Indian yielded.

"What a price, good heavens!" cried Passepartout, "for an elephant."

It only remained now to find a guide, which was comparatively easy.  A
young Parsee, with an intelligent face, offered his services, which Mr.
Fogg accepted, promising so generous a reward as to materially
stimulate his zeal.  The elephant was led out and equipped.  The
Parsee, who was an accomplished elephant driver, covered his back with
a sort of saddle-cloth, and attached to each of his flanks some
curiously uncomfortable howdahs.  Phileas Fogg paid the Indian with
some banknotes which he extracted from the famous carpet-bag, a
proceeding that seemed to deprive poor Passepartout of his vitals.
Then he offered to carry Sir Francis to Allahabad, which the brigadier
gratefully accepted, as one traveller the more would not be likely to
fatigue the gigantic beast.  Provisions were purchased at Kholby, and,
while Sir Francis and Mr. Fogg took the howdahs on either side,
Passepartout got astride the saddle-cloth between them.  The Parsee
perched himself on the elephant's neck, and at nine o'clock they set
out from the village, the animal marching off through the dense forest
of palms by the shortest cut.




Chapter XII

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND HIS COMPANIONS VENTURE ACROSS THE INDIAN
FORESTS, AND WHAT ENSUED


In order to shorten the journey, the guide passed to the left of the
line where the railway was still in process of being built.  This line,
owing to the capricious turnings of the Vindhia Mountains, did not
pursue a straight course.  The Parsee, who was quite familiar with the
roads and paths in the district, declared that they would gain twenty
miles by striking directly through the forest.

Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis Cromarty, plunged to the neck in the
peculiar howdahs provided for them, were horribly jostled by the swift
trotting of the elephant, spurred on as he was by the skilful Parsee;
but they endured the discomfort with true British phlegm, talking
little, and scarcely able to catch a glimpse of each other.  As for
Passepartout, who was mounted on the beast's back, and received the
direct force of each concussion as he trod along, he was very careful,
in accordance with his master's advice, to keep his tongue from between
his teeth, as it would otherwise have been bitten off short.  The
worthy fellow bounced from the elephant's neck to his rump, and vaulted
like a clown on a spring-board; yet he laughed in the midst of his
bouncing, and from time to time took a piece of sugar out of his
pocket, and inserted it in Kiouni's trunk, who received it without in
the least slackening his regular trot.

After two hours the guide stopped the elephant, and gave him an hour
for rest, during which Kiouni, after quenching his thirst at a
neighbouring spring, set to devouring the branches and shrubs round
about him.  Neither Sir Francis nor Mr. Fogg regretted the delay, and
both descended with a feeling of relief.  "Why, he's made of iron!"
exclaimed the general, gazing admiringly on Kiouni.

"Of forged iron," replied Passepartout, as he set about preparing a
hasty breakfast.

At noon the Parsee gave the signal of departure.  The country soon
presented a very savage aspect.  Copses of dates and dwarf-palms
succeeded the dense forests; then vast, dry plains, dotted with scanty
shrubs, and sown with great blocks of syenite.  All this portion of
Bundelcund, which is little frequented by travellers, is inhabited by a
fanatical population, hardened in the most horrible practices of the
Hindoo faith.  The English have not been able to secure complete
dominion over this territory, which is subjected to the influence of
rajahs, whom it is almost impossible to reach in their inaccessible
mountain fastnesses. The travellers several times saw bands of
ferocious Indians, who, when they perceived the elephant striding
across-country, made angry and threatening motions.  The Parsee avoided
them as much as possible.  Few animals were observed on the route; even
the monkeys hurried from their path with contortions and grimaces which
convulsed Passepartout with laughter.

In the midst of his gaiety, however, one thought troubled the worthy
servant.  What would Mr. Fogg do with the elephant when he got to
Allahabad?  Would he carry him on with him?  Impossible!  The cost of
transporting him would make him ruinously expensive.  Would he sell
him, or set him free?  The estimable beast certainly deserved some
consideration.  Should Mr. Fogg choose to make him, Passepartout, a
present of Kiouni, he would be very much embarrassed; and these
thoughts did not cease worrying him for a long time.

The principal chain of the Vindhias was crossed by eight in the
evening, and another halt was made on the northern slope, in a ruined
bungalow.  They had gone nearly twenty-five miles that day, and an
equal distance still separated them from the station of Allahabad.

The night was cold.  The Parsee lit a fire in the bungalow with a few
dry branches, and the warmth was very grateful, provisions purchased at
Kholby sufficed for supper, and the travellers ate ravenously.  The
conversation, beginning with a few disconnected phrases, soon gave
place to loud and steady snores.  The guide watched Kiouni, who slept
standing, bolstering himself against the trunk of a large tree.
Nothing occurred during the night to disturb the slumberers, although
occasional growls from panthers and chatterings of monkeys broke the
silence; the more formidable beasts made no cries or hostile
demonstration against the occupants of the bungalow.  Sir Francis slept
heavily, like an honest soldier overcome with fatigue.  Passepartout
was wrapped in uneasy dreams of the bouncing of the day before.  As for
Mr. Fogg, he slumbered as peacefully as if he had been in his serene
mansion in Saville Row.

The journey was resumed at six in the morning; the guide hoped to reach
Allahabad by evening.  In that case, Mr. Fogg would only lose a part of
the forty-eight hours saved since the beginning of the tour.  Kiouni,
resuming his rapid gait, soon descended the lower spurs of the
Vindhias, and towards noon they passed by the village of Kallenger, on
the Cani, one of the branches of the Ganges.  The guide avoided
inhabited places, thinking it safer to keep the open country, which
lies along the first depressions of the basin of the great river.
Allahabad was now only twelve miles to the north-east.  They stopped
under a clump of bananas, the fruit of which, as healthy as bread and
as succulent as cream, was amply partaken of and appreciated.

At two o'clock the guide entered a thick forest which extended several
miles; he preferred to travel under cover of the woods.  They had not
as yet had any unpleasant encounters, and the journey seemed on the
point of being successfully accomplished, when the elephant, becoming
restless, suddenly stopped.

It was then four o'clock.

"What's the matter?" asked Sir Francis, putting out his head.

"I don't know, officer," replied the Parsee, listening attentively to a
confused murmur which came through the thick branches.

The murmur soon became more distinct; it now seemed like a distant
concert of human voices accompanied by brass instruments.  Passepartout
was all eyes and ears.  Mr. Fogg patiently waited without a word.  The
Parsee jumped to the ground, fastened the elephant to a tree, and
plunged into the thicket.  He soon returned, saying:

"A procession of Brahmins is coming this way.  We must prevent their
seeing us, if possible."

The guide unloosed the elephant and led him into a thicket, at the same
time asking the travellers not to stir.  He held himself ready to
bestride the animal at a moment's notice, should flight become
necessary; but he evidently thought that the procession of the faithful
would pass without perceiving them amid the thick foliage, in which
they were wholly concealed.

The discordant tones of the voices and instruments drew nearer, and now
droning songs mingled with the sound of the tambourines and cymbals.
The head of the procession soon appeared beneath the trees, a hundred
paces away; and the strange figures who performed the religious
ceremony were easily distinguished through the branches.  First came
the priests, with mitres on their heads, and clothed in long lace
robes.  They were surrounded by men, women, and children, who sang a
kind of lugubrious psalm, interrupted at regular intervals by the
tambourines and cymbals; while behind them was drawn a car with large
wheels, the spokes of which represented serpents entwined with each
other.  Upon the car, which was drawn by four richly caparisoned zebus,
stood a hideous statue with four arms, the body coloured a dull red,
with haggard eyes, dishevelled hair, protruding tongue, and lips tinted
with betel.  It stood upright upon the figure of a prostrate and
headless giant.

Sir Francis, recognising the statue, whispered, "The goddess Kali; the
goddess of love and death."

"Of death, perhaps," muttered back Passepartout, "but of love--that
ugly old hag?  Never!"

The Parsee made a motion to keep silence.

A group of old fakirs were capering and making a wild ado round the
statue; these were striped with ochre, and covered with cuts whence
their blood issued drop by drop--stupid fanatics, who, in the great
Indian ceremonies, still throw themselves under the wheels of
Juggernaut.  Some Brahmins, clad in all the sumptuousness of Oriental
apparel, and leading a woman who faltered at every step, followed.
This woman was young, and as fair as a European.  Her head and neck,
shoulders, ears, arms, hands, and toes were loaded down with jewels and
gems with bracelets, earrings, and rings; while a tunic bordered with
gold, and covered with a light muslin robe, betrayed the outline of her
form.

The guards who followed the young woman presented a violent contrast to
her, armed as they were with naked sabres hung at their waists, and
long damascened pistols, and bearing a corpse on a palanquin.  It was
the body of an old man, gorgeously arrayed in the habiliments of a
rajah, wearing, as in life, a turban embroidered with pearls, a robe of
tissue of silk and gold, a scarf of cashmere sewed with diamonds, and
the magnificent weapons of a Hindoo prince.  Next came the musicians
and a rearguard of capering fakirs, whose cries sometimes drowned the
noise of the instruments; these closed the procession.

Sir Francis watched the procession with a sad countenance, and, turning
to the guide, said, "A suttee."

The Parsee nodded, and put his finger to his lips.  The procession
slowly wound under the trees, and soon its last ranks disappeared in
the depths of the wood.  The songs gradually died away; occasionally
cries were heard in the distance, until at last all was silence again.

Phileas Fogg had heard what Sir Francis said, and, as soon as the
procession had disappeared, asked: "What is a suttee?"

"A suttee," returned the general, "is a human sacrifice, but a
voluntary one.  The woman you have just seen will be burned to-morrow
at the dawn of day."

"Oh, the scoundrels!" cried Passepartout, who could not repress his
indignation.

"And the corpse?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"Is that of the prince, her husband," said the guide; "an independent
rajah of Bundelcund."

"Is it possible," resumed Phileas Fogg, his voice betraying not the
least emotion, "that these barbarous customs still exist in India, and
that the English have been unable to put a stop to them?"

"These sacrifices do not occur in the larger portion of India," replied
Sir Francis; "but we have no power over these savage territories, and
especially here in Bundelcund.  The whole district north of the
Vindhias is the theatre of incessant murders and pillage."

"The poor wretch!" exclaimed Passepartout, "to be burned alive!"

"Yes," returned Sir Francis, "burned alive.  And, if she were not, you
cannot conceive what treatment she would be obliged to submit to from
her relatives.  They would shave off her hair, feed her on a scanty
allowance of rice, treat her with contempt; she would be looked upon as
an unclean creature, and would die in some corner, like a scurvy dog.
The prospect of so frightful an existence drives these poor creatures
to the sacrifice much more than love or religious fanaticism.
Sometimes, however, the sacrifice is really voluntary, and it requires
the active interference of the Government to prevent it.  Several years
ago, when I was living at Bombay, a young widow asked permission of the
governor to be burned along with her husband's body; but, as you may
imagine, he refused.  The woman left the town, took refuge with an
independent rajah, and there carried out her self-devoted purpose."

While Sir Francis was speaking, the guide shook his head several times,
and now said: "The sacrifice which will take place to-morrow at dawn is
not a voluntary one."

"How do you know?"

"Everybody knows about this affair in Bundelcund."

"But the wretched creature did not seem to be making any resistance,"
observed Sir Francis.

"That was because they had intoxicated her with fumes of hemp and
opium."

"But where are they taking her?"

"To the pagoda of Pillaji, two miles from here; she will pass the night
there."

"And the sacrifice will take place--"

"To-morrow, at the first light of dawn."

The guide now led the elephant out of the thicket, and leaped upon his
neck.  Just at the moment that he was about to urge Kiouni forward with
a peculiar whistle, Mr. Fogg stopped him, and, turning to Sir Francis
Cromarty, said, "Suppose we save this woman."

"Save the woman, Mr. Fogg!"

"I have yet twelve hours to spare; I can devote them to that."

"Why, you are a man of heart!"

"Sometimes," replied Phileas Fogg, quietly; "when I have the time."




Chapter XIII

IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT RECEIVES A NEW PROOF THAT FORTUNE FAVORS THE BRAVE


The project was a bold one, full of difficulty, perhaps impracticable.
Mr. Fogg was going to risk life, or at least liberty, and therefore the
success of his tour.  But he did not hesitate, and he found in Sir
Francis Cromarty an enthusiastic ally.

As for Passepartout, he was ready for anything that might be proposed.
His master's idea charmed him; he perceived a heart, a soul, under that
icy exterior.  He began to love Phileas Fogg.

There remained the guide: what course would he adopt?  Would he not
take part with the Indians?  In default of his assistance, it was
necessary to be assured of his neutrality.

Sir Francis frankly put the question to him.

"Officers," replied the guide, "I am a Parsee, and this woman is a
Parsee.  Command me as you will."

"Excellent!" said Mr. Fogg.

"However," resumed the guide, "it is certain, not only that we shall
risk our lives, but horrible tortures, if we are taken."

"That is foreseen," replied Mr. Fogg.  "I think we must wait till night
before acting."

"I think so," said the guide.

The worthy Indian then gave some account of the victim, who, he said,
was a celebrated beauty of the Parsee race, and the daughter of a
wealthy Bombay merchant.  She had received a thoroughly English
education in that city, and, from her manners and intelligence, would
be thought an European.  Her name was Aouda.  Left an orphan, she was
married against her will to the old rajah of Bundelcund; and, knowing
the fate that awaited her, she escaped, was retaken, and devoted by the
rajah's relatives, who had an interest in her death, to the sacrifice
from which it seemed she could not escape.

The Parsee's narrative only confirmed Mr. Fogg and his companions in
their generous design.  It was decided that the guide should direct the
elephant towards the pagoda of Pillaji, which he accordingly approached
as quickly as possible.  They halted, half an hour afterwards, in a
copse, some five hundred feet from the pagoda, where they were well
concealed; but they could hear the groans and cries of the fakirs
distinctly.

They then discussed the means of getting at the victim.  The guide was
familiar with the pagoda of Pillaji, in which, as he declared, the
young woman was imprisoned.  Could they enter any of its doors while
the whole party of Indians was plunged in a drunken sleep, or was it
safer to attempt to make a hole in the walls?  This could only be
determined at the moment and the place themselves; but it was certain
that the abduction must be made that night, and not when, at break of
day, the victim was led to her funeral pyre.  Then no human
intervention could save her.

As soon as night fell, about six o'clock, they decided to make a
reconnaissance around the pagoda.  The cries of the fakirs were just
ceasing; the Indians were in the act of plunging themselves into the
drunkenness caused by liquid opium mingled with hemp, and it might be
possible to slip between them to the temple itself.

The Parsee, leading the others, noiselessly crept through the wood, and
in ten minutes they found themselves on the banks of a small stream,
whence, by the light of the rosin torches, they perceived a pyre of
wood, on the top of which lay the embalmed body of the rajah, which was
to be burned with his wife.  The pagoda, whose minarets loomed above
the trees in the deepening dusk, stood a hundred steps away.

"Come!" whispered the guide.

He slipped more cautiously than ever through the brush, followed by his
companions; the silence around was only broken by the low murmuring of
the wind among the branches.

Soon the Parsee stopped on the borders of the glade, which was lit up
by the torches.  The ground was covered by groups of the Indians,
motionless in their drunken sleep; it seemed a battlefield strewn with
the dead.  Men, women, and children lay together.

In the background, among the trees, the pagoda of Pillaji loomed
distinctly.  Much to the guide's disappointment, the guards of the
rajah, lighted by torches, were watching at the doors and marching to
and fro with naked sabres; probably the priests, too, were watching
within.

The Parsee, now convinced that it was impossible to force an entrance
to the temple, advanced no farther, but led his companions back again.
Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis Cromarty also saw that nothing could be
attempted in that direction.  They stopped, and engaged in a whispered
colloquy.

"It is only eight now," said the brigadier, "and these guards may also
go to sleep."

"It is not impossible," returned the Parsee.

They lay down at the foot of a tree, and waited.

The time seemed long; the guide ever and anon left them to take an
observation on the edge of the wood, but the guards watched steadily by
the glare of the torches, and a dim light crept through the windows of
the pagoda.

They waited till midnight; but no change took place among the guards,
and it became apparent that their yielding to sleep could not be
counted on.  The other plan must be carried out; an opening in the
walls of the pagoda must be made.  It remained to ascertain whether the
priests were watching by the side of their victim as assiduously as
were the soldiers at the door.

After a last consultation, the guide announced that he was ready for
the attempt, and advanced, followed by the others.  They took a
roundabout way, so as to get at the pagoda on the rear.  They reached
the walls about half-past twelve, without having met anyone; here there
was no guard, nor were there either windows or doors.

The night was dark.  The moon, on the wane, scarcely left the horizon,
and was covered with heavy clouds; the height of the trees deepened the
darkness.

It was not enough to reach the walls; an opening in them must be
accomplished, and to attain this purpose the party only had their
pocket-knives.  Happily the temple walls were built of brick and wood,
which could be penetrated with little difficulty; after one brick had
been taken out, the rest would yield easily.

They set noiselessly to work, and the Parsee on one side and
Passepartout on the other began to loosen the bricks so as to make an
aperture two feet wide.  They were getting on rapidly, when suddenly a
cry was heard in the interior of the temple, followed almost instantly
by other cries replying from the outside.  Passepartout and the guide
stopped.  Had they been heard?  Was the alarm being given?  Common
prudence urged them to retire, and they did so, followed by Phileas
Fogg and Sir Francis.  They again hid themselves in the wood, and
waited till the disturbance, whatever it might be, ceased, holding
themselves ready to resume their attempt without delay.  But, awkwardly
enough, the guards now appeared at the rear of the temple, and there
installed themselves, in readiness to prevent a surprise.

It would be difficult to describe the disappointment of the party, thus
interrupted in their work.  They could not now reach the victim; how,
then, could they save her?  Sir Francis shook his fists, Passepartout
was beside himself, and the guide gnashed his teeth with rage.  The
tranquil Fogg waited, without betraying any emotion.

"We have nothing to do but to go away," whispered Sir Francis.

"Nothing but to go away," echoed the guide.

"Stop," said Fogg.  "I am only due at Allahabad tomorrow before noon."

"But what can you hope to do?" asked Sir Francis.  "In a few hours it
will be daylight, and--"

"The chance which now seems lost may present itself at the last moment."

Sir Francis would have liked to read Phileas Fogg's eyes.  What was
this cool Englishman thinking of?  Was he planning to make a rush for
the young woman at the very moment of the sacrifice, and boldly snatch
her from her executioners?

This would be utter folly, and it was hard to admit that Fogg was such
a fool.  Sir Francis consented, however, to remain to the end of this
terrible drama.  The guide led them to the rear of the glade, where
they were able to observe the sleeping groups.

Meanwhile Passepartout, who had perched himself on the lower branches
of a tree, was resolving an idea which had at first struck him like a
flash, and which was now firmly lodged in his brain.

He had commenced by saying to himself, "What folly!" and then he
repeated, "Why not, after all?  It's a chance,--perhaps the only one; and
with such sots!" Thinking thus, he slipped, with the suppleness of a
serpent, to the lowest branches, the ends of which bent almost to the
ground.

The hours passed, and the lighter shades now announced the approach of
day, though it was not yet light.  This was the moment.  The slumbering
multitude became animated, the tambourines sounded, songs and cries
arose; the hour of the sacrifice had come.  The doors of the pagoda
swung open, and a bright light escaped from its interior, in the midst
of which Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis espied the victim.  She seemed,
having shaken off the stupor of intoxication, to be striving to escape
from her executioner.  Sir Francis's heart throbbed; and, convulsively
seizing Mr. Fogg's hand, found in it an open knife.  Just at this
moment the crowd began to move.  The young woman had again fallen into
a stupor caused by the fumes of hemp, and passed among the fakirs, who
escorted her with their wild, religious cries.

Phileas Fogg and his companions, mingling in the rear ranks of the
crowd, followed; and in two minutes they reached the banks of the
stream, and stopped fifty paces from the pyre, upon which still lay the
rajah's corpse.  In the semi-obscurity they saw the victim, quite
senseless, stretched out beside her husband's body. Then a torch was
brought, and the wood, heavily soaked with oil, instantly took fire.

At this moment Sir Francis and the guide seized Phileas Fogg, who, in
an instant of mad generosity, was about to rush upon the pyre.  But he
had quickly pushed them aside, when the whole scene suddenly changed.
A cry of terror arose.  The whole multitude prostrated themselves,
terror-stricken, on the ground.

The old rajah was not dead, then, since he rose of a sudden, like a
spectre, took up his wife in his arms, and descended from the pyre in
the midst of the clouds of smoke, which only heightened his ghostly
appearance.

Fakirs and soldiers and priests, seized with instant terror, lay there,
with their faces on the ground, not daring to lift their eyes and
behold such a prodigy.

The inanimate victim was borne along by the vigorous arms which
supported her, and which she did not seem in the least to burden.  Mr.
Fogg and Sir Francis stood erect, the Parsee bowed his head, and
Passepartout was, no doubt, scarcely less stupefied.

The resuscitated rajah approached Sir Francis and Mr. Fogg, and, in an
abrupt tone, said, "Let us be off!"

It was Passepartout himself, who had slipped upon the pyre in the midst
of the smoke and, profiting by the still overhanging darkness, had
delivered the young woman from death!  It was Passepartout who, playing
his part with a happy audacity, had passed through the crowd amid the
general terror.

A moment after all four of the party had disappeared in the woods, and
the elephant was bearing them away at a rapid pace. But the cries and
noise, and a ball which whizzed through Phileas Fogg's hat, apprised
them that the trick had been discovered.

The old rajah's body, indeed, now appeared upon the burning pyre; and
the priests, recovered from their terror, perceived that an abduction
had taken place.  They hastened into the forest, followed by the
soldiers, who fired a volley after the fugitives; but the latter
rapidly increased the distance between them, and ere long found
themselves beyond the reach of the bullets and arrows.




Chapter XIV

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG DESCENDS THE WHOLE LENGTH OF THE BEAUTIFUL VALLEY
OF THE GANGES WITHOUT EVER THINKING OF SEEING IT


The rash exploit had been accomplished; and for an hour Passepartout
laughed gaily at his success.  Sir Francis pressed the worthy fellow's
hand, and his master said, "Well done!" which, from him, was high
commendation; to which Passepartout replied that all the credit of the
affair belonged to Mr. Fogg.  As for him, he had only been struck with
a "queer" idea; and he laughed to think that for a few moments he,
Passepartout, the ex-gymnast, ex-sergeant fireman, had been the spouse
of a charming woman, a venerable, embalmed rajah!  As for the young
Indian woman, she had been unconscious throughout of what was passing,
and now, wrapped up in a travelling-blanket, was reposing in one of the
howdahs.

The elephant, thanks to the skilful guidance of the Parsee, was
advancing rapidly through the still darksome forest, and, an hour after
leaving the pagoda, had crossed a vast plain.  They made a halt at
seven o'clock, the young woman being still in a state of complete
prostration.  The guide made her drink a little brandy and water, but
the drowsiness which stupefied her could not yet be shaken off.  Sir
Francis, who was familiar with the effects of the intoxication produced
by the fumes of hemp, reassured his companions on her account.  But he
was more disturbed at the prospect of her future fate.  He told Phileas
Fogg that, should Aouda remain in India, she would inevitably fall
again into the hands of her executioners.  These fanatics were
scattered throughout the county, and would, despite the English police,
recover their victim at Madras, Bombay, or Calcutta.  She would only be
safe by quitting India for ever.

Phileas Fogg replied that he would reflect upon the matter.

The station at Allahabad was reached about ten o'clock, and, the
interrupted line of railway being resumed, would enable them to reach
Calcutta in less than twenty-four hours.  Phileas Fogg would thus be
able to arrive in time to take the steamer which left Calcutta the next
day, October 25th, at noon, for Hong Kong.

The young woman was placed in one of the waiting-rooms of the station,
whilst Passepartout was charged with purchasing for her various
articles of toilet, a dress, shawl, and some furs; for which his master
gave him unlimited credit.  Passepartout started off forthwith, and
found himself in the streets of Allahabad, that is, the City of God,
one of the most venerated in India, being built at the junction of the
two sacred rivers, Ganges and Jumna, the waters of which attract
pilgrims from every part of the peninsula.  The Ganges, according to
the legends of the Ramayana, rises in heaven, whence, owing to Brahma's
agency, it descends to the earth.

Passepartout made it a point, as he made his purchases, to take a good
look at the city.  It was formerly defended by a noble fort, which has
since become a state prison; its commerce has dwindled away, and
Passepartout in vain looked about him for such a bazaar as he used to
frequent in Regent Street.  At last he came upon an elderly, crusty
Jew, who sold second-hand articles, and from whom he purchased a dress
of Scotch stuff, a large mantle, and a fine otter-skin pelisse, for
which he did not hesitate to pay seventy-five pounds.  He then returned
triumphantly to the station.

The influence to which the priests of Pillaji had subjected Aouda began
gradually to yield, and she became more herself, so that her fine eyes
resumed all their soft Indian expression.

When the poet-king, Ucaf Uddaul, celebrates the charms of the queen of
Ahmehnagara, he speaks thus:

"Her shining tresses, divided in two parts, encircle the harmonious
contour of her white and delicate cheeks, brilliant in their glow and
freshness.  Her ebony brows have the form and charm of the bow of Kama,
the god of love, and beneath her long silken lashes the purest
reflections and a celestial light swim, as in the sacred lakes of
Himalaya, in the black pupils of her great clear eyes.  Her teeth,
fine, equal, and white, glitter between her smiling lips like dewdrops
in a passion-flower's half-enveloped breast.  Her delicately formed
ears, her vermilion hands, her little feet, curved and tender as the
lotus-bud, glitter with the brilliancy of the loveliest pearls of
Ceylon, the most dazzling diamonds of Golconda.  Her narrow and supple
waist, which a hand may clasp around, sets forth the outline of her
rounded figure and the beauty of her bosom, where youth in its flower
displays the wealth of its treasures; and beneath the silken folds of
her tunic she seems to have been modelled in pure silver by the godlike
hand of Vicvarcarma, the immortal sculptor."

It is enough to say, without applying this poetical rhapsody to Aouda,
that she was a charming woman, in all the European acceptation of the
phrase.  She spoke English with great purity, and the guide had not
exaggerated in saying that the young Parsee had been transformed by her
bringing up.

The train was about to start from Allahabad, and Mr. Fogg proceeded to
pay the guide the price agreed upon for his service, and not a farthing
more; which astonished Passepartout, who remembered all that his master
owed to the guide's devotion.  He had, indeed, risked his life in the
adventure at Pillaji, and, if he should be caught afterwards by the
Indians, he would with difficulty escape their vengeance.  Kiouni,
also, must be disposed of.  What should be done with the elephant,
which had been so dearly purchased?  Phileas Fogg had already
determined this question.

"Parsee," said he to the guide, "you have been serviceable and devoted.
I have paid for your service, but not for your devotion.  Would you
like to have this elephant?  He is yours."

The guide's eyes glistened.

"Your honour is giving me a fortune!" cried he.

"Take him, guide," returned Mr. Fogg, "and I shall still be your
debtor."

"Good!" exclaimed Passepartout.  "Take him, friend.  Kiouni is a brave
and faithful beast."  And, going up to the elephant, he gave him
several lumps of sugar, saying, "Here, Kiouni, here, here."

The elephant grunted out his satisfaction, and, clasping Passepartout
around the waist with his trunk, lifted him as high as his head.
Passepartout, not in the least alarmed, caressed the animal, which
replaced him gently on the ground.

Soon after, Phileas Fogg, Sir Francis Cromarty, and Passepartout,
installed in a carriage with Aouda, who had the best seat, were
whirling at full speed towards Benares.  It was a run of eighty miles,
and was accomplished in two hours.  During the journey, the young woman
fully recovered her senses.  What was her astonishment to find herself
in this carriage, on the railway, dressed in European habiliments, and
with travellers who were quite strangers to her!  Her companions first
set about fully reviving her with a little liquor, and then Sir Francis
narrated to her what had passed, dwelling upon the courage with which
Phileas Fogg had not hesitated to risk his life to save her, and
recounting the happy sequel of the venture, the result of
Passepartout's rash idea.  Mr. Fogg said nothing; while Passepartout,
abashed, kept repeating that "it wasn't worth telling."

Aouda pathetically thanked her deliverers, rather with tears than
words; her fine eyes interpreted her gratitude better than her lips.
Then, as her thoughts strayed back to the scene of the sacrifice, and
recalled the dangers which still menaced her, she shuddered with terror.

Phileas Fogg understood what was passing in Aouda's mind, and offered,
in order to reassure her, to escort her to Hong Kong, where she might
remain safely until the affair was hushed up--an offer which she
eagerly and gratefully accepted.  She had, it seems, a Parsee relation,
who was one of the principal merchants of Hong Kong, which is wholly an
English city, though on an island on the Chinese coast.

At half-past twelve the train stopped at Benares.  The Brahmin legends
assert that this city is built on the site of the ancient Casi, which,
like Mahomet's tomb, was once suspended between heaven and earth;
though the Benares of to-day, which the Orientalists call the Athens of
India, stands quite unpoetically on the solid earth, Passepartout
caught glimpses of its brick houses and clay huts, giving an aspect of
desolation to the place, as the train entered it.

Benares was Sir Francis Cromarty's destination, the troops he was
rejoining being encamped some miles northward of the city.  He bade
adieu to Phileas Fogg, wishing him all success, and expressing the hope
that he would come that way again in a less original but more
profitable fashion.  Mr. Fogg lightly pressed him by the hand.  The
parting of Aouda, who did not forget what she owed to Sir Francis,
betrayed more warmth; and, as for Passepartout, he received a hearty
shake of the hand from the gallant general.

The railway, on leaving Benares, passed for a while along the valley of
the Ganges.  Through the windows of their carriage the travellers had
glimpses of the diversified landscape of Behar, with its mountains
clothed in verdure, its fields of barley, wheat, and corn, its jungles
peopled with green alligators, its neat villages, and its still
thickly-leaved forests.  Elephants were bathing in the waters of the
sacred river, and groups of Indians, despite the advanced season and
chilly air, were performing solemnly their pious ablutions.  These were
fervent Brahmins, the bitterest foes of Buddhism, their deities being
Vishnu, the solar god, Shiva, the divine impersonation of natural
forces, and Brahma, the supreme ruler of priests and legislators.  What
would these divinities think of India, anglicised as it is to-day, with
steamers whistling and scudding along the Ganges, frightening the gulls
which float upon its surface, the turtles swarming along its banks, and
the faithful dwelling upon its borders?

The panorama passed before their eyes like a flash, save when the steam
concealed it fitfully from the view; the travellers could scarcely
discern the fort of Chupenie, twenty miles south-westward from Benares,
the ancient stronghold of the rajahs of Behar; or Ghazipur and its
famous rose-water factories; or the tomb of Lord Cornwallis, rising on
the left bank of the Ganges; the fortified town of Buxar, or Patna, a
large manufacturing and trading-place, where is held the principal
opium market of India; or Monghir, a more than European town, for it is
as English as Manchester or Birmingham, with its iron foundries,
edgetool factories, and high chimneys puffing clouds of black smoke
heavenward.

Night came on; the train passed on at full speed, in the midst of the
roaring of the tigers, bears, and wolves which fled before the
locomotive; and the marvels of Bengal, Golconda ruined Gour,
Murshedabad, the ancient capital, Burdwan, Hugly, and the French town
of Chandernagor, where Passepartout would have been proud to see his
country's flag flying, were hidden from their view in the darkness.

Calcutta was reached at seven in the morning, and the packet left for
Hong Kong at noon; so that Phileas Fogg had five hours before him.

According to his journal, he was due at Calcutta on the 25th of
October, and that was the exact date of his actual arrival.  He was
therefore neither behind-hand nor ahead of time.  The two days gained
between London and Bombay had been lost, as has been seen, in the
journey across India.  But it is not to be supposed that Phileas Fogg
regretted them.




Chapter XV

IN WHICH THE BAG OF BANKNOTES DISGORGES SOME THOUSANDS OF POUNDS MORE


The train entered the station, and Passepartout jumping out first, was
followed by Mr. Fogg, who assisted his fair companion to descend.
Phileas Fogg intended to proceed at once to the Hong Kong steamer, in
order to get Aouda comfortably settled for the voyage.  He was
unwilling to leave her while they were still on dangerous ground.

Just as he was leaving the station a policeman came up to him, and
said, "Mr. Phileas Fogg?"

"I am he."

"Is this man your servant?" added the policeman, pointing to
Passepartout.

"Yes."

"Be so good, both of you, as to follow me."

Mr. Fogg betrayed no surprise whatever.  The policeman was a
representative of the law, and law is sacred to an Englishman.
Passepartout tried to reason about the matter, but the policeman tapped
him with his stick, and Mr. Fogg made him a signal to obey.

"May this young lady go with us?" asked he.

"She may," replied the policeman.

Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout were conducted to a palkigahri, a
sort of four-wheeled carriage, drawn by two horses, in which they took
their places and were driven away.  No one spoke during the twenty
minutes which elapsed before they reached their destination.  They
first passed through the "black town," with its narrow streets, its
miserable, dirty huts, and squalid population; then through the
"European town," which presented a relief in its bright brick mansions,
shaded by coconut-trees and bristling with masts, where, although it
was early morning, elegantly dressed horsemen and handsome equipages
were passing back and forth.

The carriage stopped before a modest-looking house, which, however, did
not have the appearance of a private mansion.  The policeman having
requested his prisoners--for so, truly, they might be called--to descend,
conducted them into a room with barred windows, and said:  "You will
appear before Judge Obadiah at half-past eight."

He then retired, and closed the door.

"Why, we are prisoners!" exclaimed Passepartout, falling into a chair.

Aouda, with an emotion she tried to conceal, said to Mr. Fogg: "Sir,
you must leave me to my fate!  It is on my account that you receive
this treatment, it is for having saved me!"

Phileas Fogg contented himself with saying that it was impossible.  It
was quite unlikely that he should be arrested for preventing a suttee.
The complainants would not dare present themselves with such a charge.
There was some mistake.  Moreover, he would not, in any event, abandon
Aouda, but would escort her to Hong Kong.

"But the steamer leaves at noon!" observed Passepartout, nervously.

"We shall be on board by noon," replied his master, placidly.

It was said so positively that Passepartout could not help muttering to
himself, "Parbleu that's certain!  Before noon we shall be on board."
But he was by no means reassured.

At half-past eight the door opened, the policeman appeared, and,
requesting them to follow him, led the way to an adjoining hall.  It
was evidently a court-room, and a crowd of Europeans and natives
already occupied the rear of the apartment.

Mr. Fogg and his two companions took their places on a bench opposite
the desks of the magistrate and his clerk.  Immediately after, Judge
Obadiah, a fat, round man, followed by the clerk, entered.  He
proceeded to take down a wig which was hanging on a nail, and put it
hurriedly on his head.

"The first case," said he.  Then, putting his hand to his head, he
exclaimed, "Heh!  This is not my wig!"

"No, your worship," returned the clerk, "it is mine."

"My dear Mr. Oysterpuff, how can a judge give a wise sentence in a
clerk's wig?"

The wigs were exchanged.

Passepartout was getting nervous, for the hands on the face of the big
clock over the judge seemed to go around with terrible rapidity.

"The first case," repeated Judge Obadiah.

"Phileas Fogg?" demanded Oysterpuff.

"I am here," replied Mr. Fogg.

"Passepartout?"

"Present," responded Passepartout.

"Good," said the judge.  "You have been looked for, prisoners, for two
days on the trains from Bombay."

"But of what are we accused?" asked Passepartout, impatiently.

"You are about to be informed."

"I am an English subject, sir," said Mr. Fogg, "and I have the right--"

"Have you been ill-treated?"

"Not at all."

"Very well; let the complainants come in."

A door was swung open by order of the judge, and three Indian priests
entered.

"That's it," muttered Passepartout; "these are the rogues who were
going to burn our young lady."

The priests took their places in front of the judge, and the clerk
proceeded to read in a loud voice a complaint of sacrilege against
Phileas Fogg and his servant, who were accused of having violated a
place held consecrated by the Brahmin religion.

"You hear the charge?" asked the judge.

"Yes, sir," replied Mr. Fogg, consulting his watch, "and I admit it."

"You admit it?"

"I admit it, and I wish to hear these priests admit, in their turn,
what they were going to do at the pagoda of Pillaji."

The priests looked at each other; they did not seem to understand what
was said.

"Yes," cried Passepartout, warmly; "at the pagoda of Pillaji, where
they were on the point of burning their victim."

The judge stared with astonishment, and the priests were stupefied.

"What victim?" said Judge Obadiah.  "Burn whom?  In Bombay itself?"

"Bombay?" cried Passepartout.

"Certainly.  We are not talking of the pagoda of Pillaji, but of the
pagoda of Malabar Hill, at Bombay."

"And as a proof," added the clerk, "here are the desecrator's very
shoes, which he left behind him."

Whereupon he placed a pair of shoes on his desk.

"My shoes!" cried Passepartout, in his surprise permitting this
imprudent exclamation to escape him.

The confusion of master and man, who had quite forgotten the affair at
Bombay, for which they were now detained at Calcutta, may be imagined.

Fix the detective, had foreseen the advantage which Passepartout's
escapade gave him, and, delaying his departure for twelve hours, had
consulted the priests of Malabar Hill.  Knowing that the English
authorities dealt very severely with this kind of misdemeanour, he
promised them a goodly sum in damages, and sent them forward to
Calcutta by the next train.  Owing to the delay caused by the rescue of
the young widow, Fix and the priests reached the Indian capital before
Mr. Fogg and his servant, the magistrates having been already warned by
a dispatch to arrest them should they arrive.  Fix's disappointment
when he learned that Phileas Fogg had not made his appearance in
Calcutta may be imagined.  He made up his mind that the robber had
stopped somewhere on the route and taken refuge in the southern
provinces.  For twenty-four hours Fix watched the station with feverish
anxiety; at last he was rewarded by seeing Mr. Fogg and Passepartout
arrive, accompanied by a young woman, whose presence he was wholly at a
loss to explain.  He hastened for a policeman; and this was how the
party came to be arrested and brought before Judge Obadiah.

Had Passepartout been a little less preoccupied, he would have espied
the detective ensconced in a corner of the court-room, watching the
proceedings with an interest easily understood; for the warrant had
failed to reach him at Calcutta, as it had done at Bombay and Suez.

Judge Obadiah had unfortunately caught Passepartout's rash exclamation,
which the poor fellow would have given the world to recall.

"The facts are admitted?" asked the judge.

"Admitted," replied Mr. Fogg, coldly.

"Inasmuch," resumed the judge, "as the English law protects equally and
sternly the religions of the Indian people, and as the man Passepartout
has admitted that he violated the sacred pagoda of Malabar Hill, at
Bombay, on the 20th of October, I condemn the said Passepartout to
imprisonment for fifteen days and a fine of three hundred pounds."

"Three hundred pounds!" cried Passepartout, startled at the largeness
of the sum.

"Silence!" shouted the constable.

"And inasmuch," continued the judge, "as it is not proved that the act
was not done by the connivance of the master with the servant, and as
the master in any case must be held responsible for the acts of his
paid servant, I condemn Phileas Fogg to a week's imprisonment and a
fine of one hundred and fifty pounds."

Fix rubbed his hands softly with satisfaction; if Phileas Fogg could be
detained in Calcutta a week, it would be more than time for the warrant
to arrive.  Passepartout was stupefied.  This sentence ruined his
master.  A wager of twenty thousand pounds lost, because he, like a
precious fool, had gone into that abominable pagoda!

Phileas Fogg, as self-composed as if the judgment did not in the least
concern him, did not even lift his eyebrows while it was being
pronounced.  Just as the clerk was calling the next case, he rose, and
said, "I offer bail."

"You have that right," returned the judge.

Fix's blood ran cold, but he resumed his composure when he heard the
judge announce that the bail required for each prisoner would be one
thousand pounds.

"I will pay it at once," said Mr. Fogg, taking a roll of bank-bills
from the carpet-bag, which Passepartout had by him, and placing them on
the clerk's desk.

"This sum will be restored to you upon your release from prison," said
the judge.  "Meanwhile, you are liberated on bail."

"Come!" said Phileas Fogg to his servant.

"But let them at least give me back my shoes!" cried Passepartout
angrily.

"Ah, these are pretty dear shoes!" he muttered, as they were handed to
him.  "More than a thousand pounds apiece; besides, they pinch my feet."

Mr. Fogg, offering his arm to Aouda, then departed, followed by the
crestfallen Passepartout.  Fix still nourished hopes that the robber
would not, after all, leave the two thousand pounds behind him, but
would decide to serve out his week in jail, and issued forth on Mr.
Fogg's traces.  That gentleman took a carriage, and the party were soon
landed on one of the quays.

The Rangoon was moored half a mile off in the harbour, its signal of
departure hoisted at the mast-head.  Eleven o'clock was striking; Mr.
Fogg was an hour in advance of time.  Fix saw them leave the carriage
and push off in a boat for the steamer, and stamped his feet with
disappointment.

"The rascal is off, after all!" he exclaimed.  "Two thousand pounds
sacrificed!  He's as prodigal as a thief!  I'll follow him to the end
of the world if necessary; but, at the rate he is going on, the stolen
money will soon be exhausted."

The detective was not far wrong in making this conjecture.  Since
leaving London, what with travelling expenses, bribes, the purchase of
the elephant, bails, and fines, Mr. Fogg had already spent more than
five thousand pounds on the way, and the percentage of the sum
recovered from the bank robber promised to the detectives, was rapidly
diminishing.




Chapter XVI

IN WHICH FIX DOES NOT SEEM TO UNDERSTAND IN THE LEAST WHAT IS SAID TO
HIM


The Rangoon--one of the Peninsular and Oriental Company's boats plying
in the Chinese and Japanese seas--was a screw steamer, built of iron,
weighing about seventeen hundred and seventy tons, and with engines of
four hundred horse-power.  She was as fast, but not as well fitted up,
as the Mongolia, and Aouda was not as comfortably provided for on board
of her as Phileas Fogg could have wished.  However, the trip from
Calcutta to Hong Kong only comprised some three thousand five hundred
miles, occupying from ten to twelve days, and the young woman was not
difficult to please.

During the first days of the journey Aouda became better acquainted
with her protector, and constantly gave evidence of her deep gratitude
for what he had done.  The phlegmatic gentleman listened to her,
apparently at least, with coldness, neither his voice nor his manner
betraying the slightest emotion; but he seemed to be always on the
watch that nothing should be wanting to Aouda's comfort.  He visited
her regularly each day at certain hours, not so much to talk himself,
as to sit and hear her talk.  He treated her with the strictest
politeness, but with the precision of an automaton, the movements of
which had been arranged for this purpose.  Aouda did not quite know
what to make of him, though Passepartout had given her some hints of
his master's eccentricity, and made her smile by telling her of the
wager which was sending him round the world.  After all, she owed
Phileas Fogg her life, and she always regarded him through the exalting
medium of her gratitude.

Aouda confirmed the Parsee guide's narrative of her touching history.
She did, indeed, belong to the highest of the native races of India.
Many of the Parsee merchants have made great fortunes there by dealing
in cotton; and one of them, Sir Jametsee Jeejeebhoy, was made a baronet
by the English government.  Aouda was a relative of this great man, and
it was his cousin, Jeejeeh, whom she hoped to join at Hong Kong.
Whether she would find a protector in him she could not tell; but Mr.
Fogg essayed to calm her anxieties, and to assure her that everything
would be mathematically--he used the very word--arranged.  Aouda
fastened her great eyes, "clear as the sacred lakes of the Himalaya,"
upon him; but the intractable Fogg, as reserved as ever, did not seem
at all inclined to throw himself into this lake.

The first few days of the voyage passed prosperously, amid favourable
weather and propitious winds, and they soon came in sight of the great
Andaman, the principal of the islands in the Bay of Bengal, with its
picturesque Saddle Peak, two thousand four hundred feet high, looming
above the waters.  The steamer passed along near the shores, but the
savage Papuans, who are in the lowest scale of humanity, but are not,
as has been asserted, cannibals, did not make their appearance.

The panorama of the islands, as they steamed by them, was superb.  Vast
forests of palms, arecs, bamboo, teakwood, of the gigantic mimosa, and
tree-like ferns covered the foreground, while behind, the graceful
outlines of the mountains were traced against the sky; and along the
coasts swarmed by thousands the precious swallows whose nests furnish a
luxurious dish to the tables of the Celestial Empire.  The varied
landscape afforded by the Andaman Islands was soon passed, however, and
the Rangoon rapidly approached the Straits of Malacca, which gave
access to the China seas.

What was detective Fix, so unluckily drawn on from country to country,
doing all this while?  He had managed to embark on the Rangoon at
Calcutta without being seen by Passepartout, after leaving orders that,
if the warrant should arrive, it should be forwarded to him at Hong
Kong; and he hoped to conceal his presence to the end of the voyage.
It would have been difficult to explain why he was on board without
awakening Passepartout's suspicions, who thought him still at Bombay.
But necessity impelled him, nevertheless, to renew his acquaintance
with the worthy servant, as will be seen.

All the detective's hopes and wishes were now centred on Hong Kong; for
the steamer's stay at Singapore would be too brief to enable him to
take any steps there.  The arrest must be made at Hong Kong, or the
robber would probably escape him for ever.  Hong Kong was the last
English ground on which he would set foot; beyond, China, Japan,
America offered to Fogg an almost certain refuge.  If the warrant
should at last make its appearance at Hong Kong, Fix could arrest him
and give him into the hands of the local police, and there would be no
further trouble.  But beyond Hong Kong, a simple warrant would be of no
avail; an extradition warrant would be necessary, and that would result
in delays and obstacles, of which the rascal would take advantage to
elude justice.

Fix thought over these probabilities during the long hours which he
spent in his cabin, and kept repeating to himself, "Now, either the
warrant will be at Hong Kong, in which case I shall arrest my man, or
it will not be there; and this time it is absolutely necessary that I
should delay his departure.  I have failed at Bombay, and I have failed
at Calcutta; if I fail at Hong Kong, my reputation is lost:  Cost what
it may, I must succeed!  But how shall I prevent his departure, if that
should turn out to be my last resource?"

Fix made up his mind that, if worst came to worst, he would make a
confidant of Passepartout, and tell him what kind of a fellow his
master really was.  That Passepartout was not Fogg's accomplice, he was
very certain.  The servant, enlightened by his disclosure, and afraid
of being himself implicated in the crime, would doubtless become an
ally of the detective.  But this method was a dangerous one, only to be
employed when everything else had failed.  A word from Passepartout to
his master would ruin all.  The detective was therefore in a sore
strait.  But suddenly a new idea struck him.  The presence of Aouda on
the Rangoon, in company with Phileas Fogg, gave him new material for
reflection.

Who was this woman?  What combination of events had made her Fogg's
travelling companion?  They had evidently met somewhere between Bombay
and Calcutta; but where?  Had they met accidentally, or had Fogg gone
into the interior purposely in quest of this charming damsel?  Fix was
fairly puzzled.  He asked himself whether there had not been a wicked
elopement; and this idea so impressed itself upon his mind that he
determined to make use of the supposed intrigue.  Whether the young
woman were married or not, he would be able to create such difficulties
for Mr. Fogg at Hong Kong that he could not escape by paying any amount
of money.

But could he even wait till they reached Hong Kong?  Fogg had an
abominable way of jumping from one boat to another, and, before
anything could be effected, might get full under way again for Yokohama.

Fix decided that he must warn the English authorities, and signal the
Rangoon before her arrival.  This was easy to do, since the steamer
stopped at Singapore, whence there is a telegraphic wire to Hong Kong.
He finally resolved, moreover, before acting more positively, to
question Passepartout.  It would not be difficult to make him talk;
and, as there was no time to lose, Fix prepared to make himself known.

It was now the 30th of October, and on the following day the Rangoon
was due at Singapore.

Fix emerged from his cabin and went on deck.  Passepartout was
promenading up and down in the forward part of the steamer.  The
detective rushed forward with every appearance of extreme surprise, and
exclaimed, "You here, on the Rangoon?"

"What, Monsieur Fix, are you on board?" returned the really astonished
Passepartout, recognising his crony of the Mongolia.  "Why, I left you
at Bombay, and here you are, on the way to Hong Kong!  Are you going
round the world too?"

"No, no," replied Fix; "I shall stop at Hong Kong--at least for some
days."

"Hum!" said Passepartout, who seemed for an instant perplexed.  "But
how is it I have not seen you on board since we left Calcutta?"

"Oh, a trifle of sea-sickness--I've been staying in my berth.  The Gulf
of Bengal does not agree with me as well as the Indian Ocean.  And how
is Mr. Fogg?"

"As well and as punctual as ever, not a day behind time!  But, Monsieur
Fix, you don't know that we have a young lady with us."

"A young lady?" replied the detective, not seeming to comprehend what
was said.

Passepartout thereupon recounted Aouda's history, the affair at the
Bombay pagoda, the purchase of the elephant for two thousand pounds,
the rescue, the arrest, and sentence of the Calcutta court, and the
restoration of Mr. Fogg and himself to liberty on bail.  Fix, who was
familiar with the last events, seemed to be equally ignorant of all
that Passepartout related; and the later was charmed to find so
interested a listener.

"But does your master propose to carry this young woman to Europe?"

"Not at all.  We are simply going to place her under the protection of
one of her relatives, a rich merchant at Hong Kong."

"Nothing to be done there," said Fix to himself, concealing his
disappointment.  "A glass of gin, Mr. Passepartout?"

"Willingly, Monsieur Fix.  We must at least have a friendly glass on
board the Rangoon."




Chapter XVII

SHOWING WHAT HAPPENED ON THE VOYAGE FROM SINGAPORE TO HONG KONG


The detective and Passepartout met often on deck after this interview,
though Fix was reserved, and did not attempt to induce his companion to
divulge any more facts concerning Mr. Fogg.  He caught a glimpse of
that mysterious gentleman once or twice; but Mr. Fogg usually confined
himself to the cabin, where he kept Aouda company, or, according to his
inveterate habit, took a hand at whist.

Passepartout began very seriously to conjecture what strange chance
kept Fix still on the route that his master was pursuing.  It was
really worth considering why this certainly very amiable and complacent
person, whom he had first met at Suez, had then encountered on board
the Mongolia, who disembarked at Bombay, which he announced as his
destination, and now turned up so unexpectedly on the Rangoon, was
following Mr. Fogg's tracks step by step.  What was Fix's object?
Passepartout was ready to wager his Indian shoes--which he religiously
preserved--that Fix would also leave Hong Kong at the same time with
them, and probably on the same steamer.

Passepartout might have cudgelled his brain for a century without
hitting upon the real object which the detective had in view.  He never
could have imagined that Phileas Fogg was being tracked as a robber
around the globe.  But, as it is in human nature to attempt the
solution of every mystery, Passepartout suddenly discovered an
explanation of Fix's movements, which was in truth far from
unreasonable.  Fix, he thought, could only be an agent of Mr. Fogg's
friends at the Reform Club, sent to follow him up, and to ascertain
that he really went round the world as had been agreed upon.

"It's clear!" repeated the worthy servant to himself, proud of his
shrewdness.  "He's a spy sent to keep us in view!  That isn't quite the
thing, either, to be spying Mr. Fogg, who is so honourable a man!  Ah,
gentlemen of the Reform, this shall cost you dear!"

Passepartout, enchanted with his discovery, resolved to say nothing to
his master, lest he should be justly offended at this mistrust on the
part of his adversaries.  But he determined to chaff Fix, when he had
the chance, with mysterious allusions, which, however, need not betray
his real suspicions.

During the afternoon of Wednesday, 30th October, the Rangoon entered
the Strait of Malacca, which separates the peninsula of that name from
Sumatra.  The mountainous and craggy islets intercepted the beauties of
this noble island from the view of the travellers.  The Rangoon weighed
anchor at Singapore the next day at four a.m., to receive coal, having
gained half a day on the prescribed time of her arrival.  Phileas Fogg
noted this gain in his journal, and then, accompanied by Aouda, who
betrayed a desire for a walk on shore, disembarked.

Fix, who suspected Mr. Fogg's every movement, followed them cautiously,
without being himself perceived; while Passepartout, laughing in his
sleeve at Fix's manoeuvres, went about his usual errands.

The island of Singapore is not imposing in aspect, for there are no
mountains; yet its appearance is not without attractions.  It is a park
checkered by pleasant highways and avenues.  A handsome carriage, drawn
by a sleek pair of New Holland horses, carried Phileas Fogg and Aouda
into the midst of rows of palms with brilliant foliage, and of
clove-trees, whereof the cloves form the heart of a half-open flower.
Pepper plants replaced the prickly hedges of European fields;
sago-bushes, large ferns with gorgeous branches, varied the aspect of
this tropical clime; while nutmeg-trees in full foliage filled the air
with a penetrating perfume.  Agile and grinning bands of monkeys
skipped about in the trees, nor were tigers wanting in the jungles.

After a drive of two hours through the country, Aouda and Mr. Fogg
returned to the town, which is a vast collection of heavy-looking,
irregular houses, surrounded by charming gardens rich in tropical
fruits and plants; and at ten o'clock they re-embarked, closely
followed by the detective, who had kept them constantly in sight.

Passepartout, who had been purchasing several dozen mangoes--a fruit
as large as good-sized apples, of a dark-brown colour outside and a
bright red within, and whose white pulp, melting in the mouth, affords
gourmands a delicious sensation--was waiting for them on deck.  He was
only too glad to offer some mangoes to Aouda, who thanked him very
gracefully for them.

At eleven o'clock the Rangoon rode out of Singapore harbour, and in a
few hours the high mountains of Malacca, with their forests, inhabited
by the most beautifully-furred tigers in the world, were lost to view.
Singapore is distant some thirteen hundred miles from the island of
Hong Kong, which is a little English colony near the Chinese coast.
Phileas Fogg hoped to accomplish the journey in six days, so as to be
in time for the steamer which would leave on the 6th of November for
Yokohama, the principal Japanese port.

The Rangoon had a large quota of passengers, many of whom disembarked
at Singapore, among them a number of Indians, Ceylonese, Chinamen,
Malays, and Portuguese, mostly second-class travellers.

The weather, which had hitherto been fine, changed with the last
quarter of the moon.  The sea rolled heavily, and the wind at intervals
rose almost to a storm, but happily blew from the south-west, and thus
aided the steamer's progress.  The captain as often as possible put up
his sails, and under the double action of steam and sail the vessel
made rapid progress along the coasts of Anam and Cochin China.  Owing
to the defective construction of the Rangoon, however, unusual
precautions became necessary in unfavourable weather; but the loss of
time which resulted from this cause, while it nearly drove Passepartout
out of his senses, did not seem to affect his master in the least.
Passepartout blamed the captain, the engineer, and the crew, and
consigned all who were connected with the ship to the land where the
pepper grows.  Perhaps the thought of the gas, which was remorselessly
burning at his expense in Saville Row, had something to do with his hot
impatience.

"You are in a great hurry, then," said Fix to him one day, "to reach
Hong Kong?"

"A very great hurry!"

"Mr. Fogg, I suppose, is anxious to catch the steamer for Yokohama?"

"Terribly anxious."

"You believe in this journey around the world, then?"

"Absolutely.  Don't you, Mr. Fix?"

"I?  I don't believe a word of it."

"You're a sly dog!" said Passepartout, winking at him.

This expression rather disturbed Fix, without his knowing why.  Had the
Frenchman guessed his real purpose?  He knew not what to think.  But
how could Passepartout have discovered that he was a detective?  Yet,
in speaking as he did, the man evidently meant more than he expressed.

Passepartout went still further the next day; he could not hold his
tongue.

"Mr. Fix," said he, in a bantering tone, "shall we be so unfortunate as
to lose you when we get to Hong Kong?"

"Why," responded Fix, a little embarrassed, "I don't know; perhaps--"

"Ah, if you would only go on with us!  An agent of the Peninsular
Company, you know, can't stop on the way!  You were only going to
Bombay, and here you are in China.  America is not far off, and from
America to Europe is only a step."

Fix looked intently at his companion, whose countenance was as serene
as possible, and laughed with him.  But Passepartout persisted in
chaffing him by asking him if he made much by his present occupation.

"Yes, and no," returned Fix; "there is good and bad luck in such
things.  But you must understand that I don't travel at my own expense."

"Oh, I am quite sure of that!" cried Passepartout, laughing heartily.

Fix, fairly puzzled, descended to his cabin and gave himself up to his
reflections.  He was evidently suspected; somehow or other the
Frenchman had found out that he was a detective.  But had he told his
master?  What part was he playing in all this: was he an accomplice or
not?  Was the game, then, up?  Fix spent several hours turning these
things over in his mind, sometimes thinking that all was lost, then
persuading himself that Fogg was ignorant of his presence, and then
undecided what course it was best to take.

Nevertheless, he preserved his coolness of mind, and at last resolved
to deal plainly with Passepartout.  If he did not find it practicable
to arrest Fogg at Hong Kong, and if Fogg made preparations to leave
that last foothold of English territory, he, Fix, would tell
Passepartout all.  Either the servant was the accomplice of his master,
and in this case the master knew of his operations, and he should fail;
or else the servant knew nothing about the robbery, and then his
interest would be to abandon the robber.

Such was the situation between Fix and Passepartout.  Meanwhile Phileas
Fogg moved about above them in the most majestic and unconscious
indifference.  He was passing methodically in his orbit around the
world, regardless of the lesser stars which gravitated around him.  Yet
there was near by what the astronomers would call a disturbing star,
which might have produced an agitation in this gentleman's heart.  But
no! the charms of Aouda failed to act, to Passepartout's great
surprise; and the disturbances, if they existed, would have been more
difficult to calculate than those of Uranus which led to the discovery
of Neptune.

It was every day an increasing wonder to Passepartout, who read in
Aouda's eyes the depths of her gratitude to his master.  Phileas Fogg,
though brave and gallant, must be, he thought, quite heartless.  As to
the sentiment which this journey might have awakened in him, there was
clearly no trace of such a thing; while poor Passepartout existed in
perpetual reveries.

One day he was leaning on the railing of the engine-room, and was
observing the engine, when a sudden pitch of the steamer threw the
screw out of the water.  The steam came hissing out of the valves; and
this made Passepartout indignant.

"The valves are not sufficiently charged!" he exclaimed.  "We are not
going.  Oh, these English!  If this was an American craft, we should
blow up, perhaps, but we should at all events go faster!"




Chapter XVIII

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG, PASSEPARTOUT, AND FIX GO EACH ABOUT HIS BUSINESS


The weather was bad during the latter days of the voyage.  The wind,
obstinately remaining in the north-west, blew a gale, and retarded the
steamer.  The Rangoon rolled heavily and the passengers became
impatient of the long, monstrous waves which the wind raised before
their path.  A sort of tempest arose on the 3rd of November, the squall
knocking the vessel about with fury, and the waves running high.  The
Rangoon reefed all her sails, and even the rigging proved too much,
whistling and shaking amid the squall.  The steamer was forced to
proceed slowly, and the captain estimated that she would reach Hong
Kong twenty hours behind time, and more if the storm lasted.

Phileas Fogg gazed at the tempestuous sea, which seemed to be
struggling especially to delay him, with his habitual tranquillity.  He
never changed countenance for an instant, though a delay of twenty
hours, by making him too late for the Yokohama boat, would almost
inevitably cause the loss of the wager.  But this man of nerve
manifested neither impatience nor annoyance; it seemed as if the storm
were a part of his programme, and had been foreseen.  Aouda was amazed
to find him as calm as he had been from the first time she saw him.

Fix did not look at the state of things in the same light.  The storm
greatly pleased him.  His satisfaction would have been complete had the
Rangoon been forced to retreat before the violence of wind and waves.
Each delay filled him with hope, for it became more and more probable
that Fogg would be obliged to remain some days at Hong Kong; and now
the heavens themselves became his allies, with the gusts and squalls.
It mattered not that they made him sea-sick--he made no account of this
inconvenience; and, whilst his body was writhing under their effects,
his spirit bounded with hopeful exultation.

Passepartout was enraged beyond expression by the unpropitious weather.
Everything had gone so well till now!  Earth and sea had seemed to be
at his master's service; steamers and railways obeyed him; wind and
steam united to speed his journey.  Had the hour of adversity come?
Passepartout was as much excited as if the twenty thousand pounds were
to come from his own pocket.  The storm exasperated him, the gale made
him furious, and he longed to lash the obstinate sea into obedience.
Poor fellow!  Fix carefully concealed from him his own satisfaction,
for, had he betrayed it, Passepartout could scarcely have restrained
himself from personal violence.

Passepartout remained on deck as long as the tempest lasted, being
unable to remain quiet below, and taking it into his head to aid the
progress of the ship by lending a hand with the crew.  He overwhelmed
the captain, officers, and sailors, who could not help laughing at his
impatience, with all sorts of questions.  He wanted to know exactly how
long the storm was going to last; whereupon he was referred to the
barometer, which seemed to have no intention of rising.  Passepartout
shook it, but with no perceptible effect; for neither shaking nor
maledictions could prevail upon it to change its mind.

On the 4th, however, the sea became more calm, and the storm lessened
its violence; the wind veered southward, and was once more favourable.
Passepartout cleared up with the weather.  Some of the sails were
unfurled, and the Rangoon resumed its most rapid speed.  The time lost
could not, however, be regained.  Land was not signalled until five
o'clock on the morning of the 6th; the steamer was due on the 5th.
Phileas Fogg was twenty-four hours behind-hand, and the Yokohama
steamer would, of course, be missed.

The pilot went on board at six, and took his place on the bridge, to
guide the Rangoon through the channels to the port of Hong Kong.
Passepartout longed to ask him if the steamer had left for Yokohama;
but he dared not, for he wished to preserve the spark of hope, which
still remained till the last moment.  He had confided his anxiety to
Fix who--the sly rascal!--tried to console him by saying that Mr. Fogg
would be in time if he took the next boat; but this only put
Passepartout in a passion.

Mr. Fogg, bolder than his servant, did not hesitate to approach the
pilot, and tranquilly ask him if he knew when a steamer would leave
Hong Kong for Yokohama.

"At high tide to-morrow morning," answered the pilot.

"Ah!" said Mr. Fogg, without betraying any astonishment.

Passepartout, who heard what passed, would willingly have embraced the
pilot, while Fix would have been glad to twist his neck.

"What is the steamer's name?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"The Carnatic."

"Ought she not to have gone yesterday?"

"Yes, sir; but they had to repair one of her boilers, and so her
departure was postponed till to-morrow."

"Thank you," returned Mr. Fogg, descending mathematically to the saloon.

Passepartout clasped the pilot's hand and shook it heartily in his
delight, exclaiming, "Pilot, you are the best of good fellows!"

The pilot probably does not know to this day why his responses won him
this enthusiastic greeting.  He remounted the bridge, and guided the
steamer through the flotilla of junks, tankas, and fishing boats which
crowd the harbour of Hong Kong.

At one o'clock the Rangoon was at the quay, and the passengers were
going ashore.

Chance had strangely favoured Phileas Fogg, for had not the Carnatic
been forced to lie over for repairing her boilers, she would have left
on the 6th of November, and the passengers for Japan would have been
obliged to await for a week the sailing of the next steamer.  Mr. Fogg
was, it is true, twenty-four hours behind his time; but this could not
seriously imperil the remainder of his tour.

The steamer which crossed the Pacific from Yokohama to San Francisco
made a direct connection with that from Hong Kong, and it could not
sail until the latter reached Yokohama; and if Mr. Fogg was twenty-four
hours late on reaching Yokohama, this time would no doubt be easily
regained in the voyage of twenty-two days across the Pacific.  He found
himself, then, about twenty-four hours behind-hand, thirty-five days
after leaving London.

The Carnatic was announced to leave Hong Kong at five the next morning.
Mr. Fogg had sixteen hours in which to attend to his business there,
which was to deposit Aouda safely with her wealthy relative.

On landing, he conducted her to a palanquin, in which they repaired to
the Club Hotel.  A room was engaged for the young woman, and Mr. Fogg,
after seeing that she wanted for nothing, set out in search of her
cousin Jeejeeh.  He instructed Passepartout to remain at the hotel
until his return, that Aouda might not be left entirely alone.

Mr. Fogg repaired to the Exchange, where, he did not doubt, every one
would know so wealthy and considerable a personage as the Parsee
merchant.  Meeting a broker, he made the inquiry, to learn that Jeejeeh
had left China two years before, and, retiring from business with an
immense fortune, had taken up his residence in Europe--in Holland the
broker thought, with the merchants of which country he had principally
traded.  Phileas Fogg returned to the hotel, begged a moment's
conversation with Aouda, and without more ado, apprised her that
Jeejeeh was no longer at Hong Kong, but probably in Holland.

Aouda at first said nothing.  She passed her hand across her forehead,
and reflected a few moments.  Then, in her sweet, soft voice, she said:
"What ought I to do, Mr. Fogg?"

"It is very simple," responded the gentleman.  "Go on to Europe."

"But I cannot intrude--"

"You do not intrude, nor do you in the least embarrass my project.
Passepartout!"

"Monsieur."

"Go to the Carnatic, and engage three cabins."

Passepartout, delighted that the young woman, who was very gracious to
him, was going to continue the journey with them, went off at a brisk
gait to obey his master's order.




Chapter XIX

IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT TAKES A TOO GREAT INTEREST IN HIS MASTER, AND
WHAT COMES OF IT


Hong Kong is an island which came into the possession of the English by
the Treaty of Nankin, after the war of 1842; and the colonising genius
of the English has created upon it an important city and an excellent
port.  The island is situated at the mouth of the Canton River, and is
separated by about sixty miles from the Portuguese town of Macao, on
the opposite coast.  Hong Kong has beaten Macao in the struggle for the
Chinese trade, and now the greater part of the transportation of
Chinese goods finds its depot at the former place.  Docks, hospitals,
wharves, a Gothic cathedral, a government house, macadamised streets,
give to Hong Kong the appearance of a town in Kent or Surrey
transferred by some strange magic to the antipodes.

Passepartout wandered, with his hands in his pockets, towards the
Victoria port, gazing as he went at the curious palanquins and other
modes of conveyance, and the groups of Chinese, Japanese, and Europeans
who passed to and fro in the streets.  Hong Kong seemed to him not
unlike Bombay, Calcutta, and Singapore, since, like them, it betrayed
everywhere the evidence of English supremacy.  At the Victoria port he
found a confused mass of ships of all nations: English, French,
American, and Dutch, men-of-war and trading vessels, Japanese and
Chinese junks, sempas, tankas, and flower-boats, which formed so many
floating parterres.  Passepartout noticed in the crowd a number of the
natives who seemed very old and were dressed in yellow.  On going into
a barber's to get shaved he learned that these ancient men were all at
least eighty years old, at which age they are permitted to wear yellow,
which is the Imperial colour.  Passepartout, without exactly knowing
why, thought this very funny.

On reaching the quay where they were to embark on the Carnatic, he was
not astonished to find Fix walking up and down.  The detective seemed
very much disturbed and disappointed.

"This is bad," muttered Passepartout, "for the gentlemen of the Reform
Club!"  He accosted Fix with a merry smile, as if he had not perceived
that gentleman's chagrin.  The detective had, indeed, good reasons to
inveigh against the bad luck which pursued him.  The warrant had not
come!  It was certainly on the way, but as certainly it could not now
reach Hong Kong for several days; and, this being the last English
territory on Mr. Fogg's route, the robber would escape, unless he could
manage to detain him.

"Well, Monsieur Fix," said Passepartout, "have you decided to go with
us so far as America?"

"Yes," returned Fix, through his set teeth.

"Good!" exclaimed Passepartout, laughing heartily.  "I knew you could
not persuade yourself to separate from us.  Come and engage your berth."

They entered the steamer office and secured cabins for four persons.
The clerk, as he gave them the tickets, informed them that, the repairs
on the Carnatic having been completed, the steamer would leave that
very evening, and not next morning, as had been announced.

"That will suit my master all the better," said Passepartout.  "I will
go and let him know."

Fix now decided to make a bold move; he resolved to tell Passepartout
all.  It seemed to be the only possible means of keeping Phileas Fogg
several days longer at Hong Kong.  He accordingly invited his companion
into a tavern which caught his eye on the quay.  On entering, they
found themselves in a large room handsomely decorated, at the end of
which was a large camp-bed furnished with cushions.  Several persons
lay upon this bed in a deep sleep.  At the small tables which were
arranged about the room some thirty customers were drinking English
beer, porter, gin, and brandy; smoking, the while, long red clay pipes
stuffed with little balls of opium mingled with essence of rose.  From
time to time one of the smokers, overcome with the narcotic, would slip
under the table, whereupon the waiters, taking him by the head and
feet, carried and laid him upon the bed.  The bed already supported
twenty of these stupefied sots.

Fix and Passepartout saw that they were in a smoking-house haunted by
those wretched, cadaverous, idiotic creatures to whom the English
merchants sell every year the miserable drug called opium, to the
amount of one million four hundred thousand pounds--thousands devoted
to one of the most despicable vices which afflict humanity!  The
Chinese government has in vain attempted to deal with the evil by
stringent laws.  It passed gradually from the rich, to whom it was at
first exclusively reserved, to the lower classes, and then its ravages
could not be arrested.  Opium is smoked everywhere, at all times, by
men and women, in the Celestial Empire; and, once accustomed to it, the
victims cannot dispense with it, except by suffering horrible bodily
contortions and agonies.  A great smoker can smoke as many as eight
pipes a day; but he dies in five years.  It was in one of these dens
that Fix and Passepartout, in search of a friendly glass, found
themselves.  Passepartout had no money, but willingly accepted Fix's
invitation in the hope of returning the obligation at some future time.

They ordered two bottles of port, to which the Frenchman did ample
justice, whilst Fix observed him with close attention.  They chatted
about the journey, and Passepartout was especially merry at the idea
that Fix was going to continue it with them.  When the bottles were
empty, however, he rose to go and tell his master of the change in the
time of the sailing of the Carnatic.

Fix caught him by the arm, and said, "Wait a moment."

"What for, Mr. Fix?"

"I want to have a serious talk with you."

"A serious talk!" cried Passepartout, drinking up the little wine that
was left in the bottom of his glass.  "Well, we'll talk about it
to-morrow; I haven't time now."

"Stay!  What I have to say concerns your master."

Passepartout, at this, looked attentively at his companion.  Fix's face
seemed to have a singular expression.  He resumed his seat.

"What is it that you have to say?"

Fix placed his hand upon Passepartout's arm, and, lowering his voice,
said, "You have guessed who I am?"

"Parbleu!" said Passepartout, smiling.

"Then I'm going to tell you everything--"

"Now that I know everything, my friend!  Ah! that's very good.  But go
on, go on.  First, though, let me tell you that those gentlemen have
put themselves to a useless expense."

"Useless!" said Fix.  "You speak confidently.  It's clear that you
don't know how large the sum is."

"Of course I do," returned Passepartout.  "Twenty thousand pounds."

"Fifty-five thousand!" answered Fix, pressing his companion's hand.

"What!" cried the Frenchman.  "Has Monsieur Fogg dared--fifty-five
thousand pounds!  Well, there's all the more reason for not losing an
instant," he continued, getting up hastily.

Fix pushed Passepartout back in his chair, and resumed: "Fifty-five
thousand pounds; and if I succeed, I get two thousand pounds.  If
you'll help me, I'll let you have five hundred of them."

"Help you?" cried Passepartout, whose eyes were standing wide open.

"Yes; help me keep Mr. Fogg here for two or three days."

"Why, what are you saying?  Those gentlemen are not satisfied with
following my master and suspecting his honour, but they must try to put
obstacles in his way!  I blush for them!"

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that it is a piece of shameful trickery.  They might as well
waylay Mr. Fogg and put his money in their pockets!"

"That's just what we count on doing."

"It's a conspiracy, then," cried Passepartout, who became more and more
excited as the liquor mounted in his head, for he drank without
perceiving it.  "A real conspiracy!  And gentlemen, too. Bah!"

Fix began to be puzzled.

"Members of the Reform Club!" continued Passepartout.  "You must know,
Monsieur Fix, that my master is an honest man, and that, when he makes
a wager, he tries to win it fairly!"

"But who do you think I am?" asked Fix, looking at him intently.

"Parbleu!  An agent of the members of the Reform Club, sent out here to
interrupt my master's journey.  But, though I found you out some time
ago, I've taken good care to say nothing about it to Mr. Fogg."

"He knows nothing, then?"

"Nothing," replied Passepartout, again emptying his glass.

The detective passed his hand across his forehead, hesitating before he
spoke again.  What should he do?  Passepartout's mistake seemed
sincere, but it made his design more difficult.  It was evident that
the servant was not the master's accomplice, as Fix had been inclined
to suspect.

"Well," said the detective to himself, "as he is not an accomplice, he
will help me."

He had no time to lose: Fogg must be detained at Hong Kong, so he
resolved to make a clean breast of it.

"Listen to me," said Fix abruptly.  "I am not, as you think, an agent
of the members of the Reform Club--"

"Bah!" retorted Passepartout, with an air of raillery.

"I am a police detective, sent out here by the London office."

"You, a detective?"

"I will prove it.  Here is my commission."

Passepartout was speechless with astonishment when Fix displayed this
document, the genuineness of which could not be doubted.

"Mr. Fogg's wager," resumed Fix, "is only a pretext, of which you and
the gentlemen of the Reform are dupes.  He had a motive for securing
your innocent complicity."

"But why?"

"Listen.  On the 28th of last September a robbery of fifty-five
thousand pounds was committed at the Bank of England by a person whose
description was fortunately secured.  Here is his description; it
answers exactly to that of Mr. Phileas Fogg."

"What nonsense!" cried Passepartout, striking the table with his fist.
"My master is the most honourable of men!"

"How can you tell?  You know scarcely anything about him.  You went
into his service the day he came away; and he came away on a foolish
pretext, without trunks, and carrying a large amount in banknotes.  And
yet you are bold enough to assert that he is an honest man!"

"Yes, yes," repeated the poor fellow, mechanically.

"Would you like to be arrested as his accomplice?"

Passepartout, overcome by what he had heard, held his head between his
hands, and did not dare to look at the detective.  Phileas Fogg, the
saviour of Aouda, that brave and generous man, a robber!  And yet how
many presumptions there were against him!  Passepartout essayed to
reject the suspicions which forced themselves upon his mind; he did not
wish to believe that his master was guilty.

"Well, what do you want of me?" said he, at last, with an effort.

"See here," replied Fix; "I have tracked Mr. Fogg to this place, but as
yet I have failed to receive the warrant of arrest for which I sent to
London.  You must help me to keep him here in Hong Kong--"

"I!  But I--"

"I will share with you the two thousand pounds reward offered by the
Bank of England."

"Never!" replied Passepartout, who tried to rise, but fell back,
exhausted in mind and body.

"Mr. Fix," he stammered, "even should what you say be true--if my
master is really the robber you are seeking for--which I deny--I have
been, am, in his service; I have seen his generosity and goodness; and
I will never betray him--not for all the gold in the world.  I come
from a village where they don't eat that kind of bread!"

"You refuse?"

"I refuse."

"Consider that I've said nothing," said Fix; "and let us drink."

"Yes; let us drink!"

Passepartout felt himself yielding more and more to the effects of the
liquor.  Fix, seeing that he must, at all hazards, be separated from
his master, wished to entirely overcome him.  Some pipes full of opium
lay upon the table.  Fix slipped one into Passepartout's hand.  He took
it, put it between his lips, lit it, drew several puffs, and his head,
becoming heavy under the influence of the narcotic, fell upon the table.

"At last!" said Fix, seeing Passepartout unconscious.  "Mr. Fogg will
not be informed of the Carnatic's departure; and, if he is, he will
have to go without this cursed Frenchman!"

And, after paying his bill, Fix left the tavern.




Chapter XX

IN WHICH FIX COMES FACE TO FACE WITH PHILEAS FOGG


While these events were passing at the opium-house, Mr. Fogg,
unconscious of the danger he was in of losing the steamer, was quietly
escorting Aouda about the streets of the English quarter, making the
necessary purchases for the long voyage before them.  It was all very
well for an Englishman like Mr. Fogg to make the tour of the world with
a carpet-bag; a lady could not be expected to travel comfortably under
such conditions.  He acquitted his task with characteristic serenity,
and invariably replied to the remonstrances of his fair companion, who
was confused by his patience and generosity:

"It is in the interest of my journey--a part of my programme."

The purchases made, they returned to the hotel, where they dined at a
sumptuously served table-d'hote; after which Aouda, shaking hands with
her protector after the English fashion, retired to her room for rest.
Mr. Fogg absorbed himself throughout the evening in the perusal of The
Times and Illustrated London News.

Had he been capable of being astonished at anything, it would have been
not to see his servant return at bedtime.  But, knowing that the
steamer was not to leave for Yokohama until the next morning, he did
not disturb himself about the matter.  When Passepartout did not appear
the next morning to answer his master's bell, Mr. Fogg, not betraying
the least vexation, contented himself with taking his carpet-bag,
calling Aouda, and sending for a palanquin.

It was then eight o'clock; at half-past nine, it being then high tide,
the Carnatic would leave the harbour.  Mr. Fogg and Aouda got into the
palanquin, their luggage being brought after on a wheelbarrow, and half
an hour later stepped upon the quay whence they were to embark.  Mr.
Fogg then learned that the Carnatic had sailed the evening before.  He
had expected to find not only the steamer, but his domestic, and was
forced to give up both; but no sign of disappointment appeared on his
face, and he merely remarked to Aouda, "It is an accident, madam;
nothing more."

At this moment a man who had been observing him attentively approached.
It was Fix, who, bowing, addressed Mr. Fogg:  "Were you not, like me,
sir, a passenger by the Rangoon, which arrived yesterday?"

"I was, sir," replied Mr. Fogg coldly.  "But I have not the honour--"

"Pardon me; I thought I should find your servant here."

"Do you know where he is, sir?" asked Aouda anxiously.

"What!" responded Fix, feigning surprise.  "Is he not with you?"

"No," said Aouda.  "He has not made his appearance since yesterday.
Could he have gone on board the Carnatic without us?"

"Without you, madam?" answered the detective.  "Excuse me, did you
intend to sail in the Carnatic?"

"Yes, sir."

"So did I, madam, and I am excessively disappointed.  The Carnatic, its
repairs being completed, left Hong Kong twelve hours before the stated
time, without any notice being given; and we must now wait a week for
another steamer."

As he said "a week" Fix felt his heart leap for joy.  Fogg detained at
Hong Kong for a week!  There would be time for the warrant to arrive,
and fortune at last favoured the representative of the law.  His horror
may be imagined when he heard Mr. Fogg say, in his placid voice, "But
there are other vessels besides the Carnatic, it seems to me, in the
harbour of Hong Kong."

And, offering his arm to Aouda, he directed his steps toward the docks
in search of some craft about to start.  Fix, stupefied, followed; it
seemed as if he were attached to Mr. Fogg by an invisible thread.
Chance, however, appeared really to have abandoned the man it had
hitherto served so well.  For three hours Phileas Fogg wandered about
the docks, with the determination, if necessary, to charter a vessel to
carry him to Yokohama; but he could only find vessels which were
loading or unloading, and which could not therefore set sail.  Fix
began to hope again.

But Mr. Fogg, far from being discouraged, was continuing his search,
resolved not to stop if he had to resort to Macao, when he was accosted
by a sailor on one of the wharves.

"Is your honour looking for a boat?"

"Have you a boat ready to sail?"

"Yes, your honour; a pilot-boat--No. 43--the best in the harbour."

"Does she go fast?"

"Between eight and nine knots the hour.  Will you look at her?"

"Yes."

"Your honour will be satisfied with her.  Is it for a sea excursion?"

"No; for a voyage."

"A voyage?"

"Yes, will you agree to take me to Yokohama?"

The sailor leaned on the railing, opened his eyes wide, and said, "Is
your honour joking?"

"No.  I have missed the Carnatic, and I must get to Yokohama by the
14th at the latest, to take the boat for San Francisco."

"I am sorry," said the sailor; "but it is impossible."

"I offer you a hundred pounds per day, and an additional reward of two
hundred pounds if I reach Yokohama in time."

"Are you in earnest?"

"Very much so."

The pilot walked away a little distance, and gazed out to sea,
evidently struggling between the anxiety to gain a large sum and the
fear of venturing so far.  Fix was in mortal suspense.

Mr. Fogg turned to Aouda and asked her, "You would not be afraid, would
you, madam?"

"Not with you, Mr. Fogg," was her answer.

The pilot now returned, shuffling his hat in his hands.

"Well, pilot?" said Mr. Fogg.

"Well, your honour," replied he, "I could not risk myself, my men, or
my little boat of scarcely twenty tons on so long a voyage at this time
of year.  Besides, we could not reach Yokohama in time, for it is
sixteen hundred and sixty miles from Hong Kong."

"Only sixteen hundred," said Mr. Fogg.

"It's the same thing."

Fix breathed more freely.

"But," added the pilot, "it might be arranged another way."

Fix ceased to breathe at all.

"How?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"By going to Nagasaki, at the extreme south of Japan, or even to
Shanghai, which is only eight hundred miles from here.  In going to
Shanghai we should not be forced to sail wide of the Chinese coast,
which would be a great advantage, as the currents run northward, and
would aid us."

"Pilot," said Mr. Fogg, "I must take the American steamer at Yokohama,
and not at Shanghai or Nagasaki."

"Why not?" returned the pilot.  "The San Francisco steamer does not
start from Yokohama.  It puts in at Yokohama and Nagasaki, but it
starts from Shanghai."

"You are sure of that?"

"Perfectly."

"And when does the boat leave Shanghai?"

"On the 11th, at seven in the evening.  We have, therefore, four days
before us, that is ninety-six hours; and in that time, if we had good
luck and a south-west wind, and the sea was calm, we could make those
eight hundred miles to Shanghai."

"And you could go--"

"In an hour; as soon as provisions could be got aboard and the sails
put up."

"It is a bargain.  Are you the master of the boat?"

"Yes; John Bunsby, master of the Tankadere."

"Would you like some earnest-money?"

"If it would not put your honour out--"

"Here are two hundred pounds on account sir," added Phileas Fogg,
turning to Fix, "if you would like to take advantage--"

"Thanks, sir; I was about to ask the favour."

"Very well.  In half an hour we shall go on board."

"But poor Passepartout?" urged Aouda, who was much disturbed by the
servant's disappearance.

"I shall do all I can to find him," replied Phileas Fogg.

While Fix, in a feverish, nervous state, repaired to the pilot-boat,
the others directed their course to the police-station at Hong Kong.
Phileas Fogg there gave Passepartout's description, and left a sum of
money to be spent in the search for him.  The same formalities having
been gone through at the French consulate, and the palanquin having
stopped at the hotel for the luggage, which had been sent back there,
they returned to the wharf.

It was now three o'clock; and pilot-boat No. 43, with its crew on
board, and its provisions stored away, was ready for departure.

The Tankadere was a neat little craft of twenty tons, as gracefully
built as if she were a racing yacht.  Her shining copper sheathing, her
galvanised iron-work, her deck, white as ivory, betrayed the pride
taken by John Bunsby in making her presentable.  Her two masts leaned a
trifle backward; she carried brigantine, foresail, storm-jib, and
standing-jib, and was well rigged for running before the wind; and she
seemed capable of brisk speed, which, indeed, she had already proved by
gaining several prizes in pilot-boat races.  The crew of the Tankadere
was composed of John Bunsby, the master, and four hardy mariners, who
were familiar with the Chinese seas.  John Bunsby, himself, a man of
forty-five or thereabouts, vigorous, sunburnt, with a sprightly
expression of the eye, and energetic and self-reliant countenance,
would have inspired confidence in the most timid.

Phileas Fogg and Aouda went on board, where they found Fix already
installed.  Below deck was a square cabin, of which the walls bulged
out in the form of cots, above a circular divan; in the centre was a
table provided with a swinging lamp.  The accommodation was confined,
but neat.

"I am sorry to have nothing better to offer you," said Mr. Fogg to Fix,
who bowed without responding.

The detective had a feeling akin to humiliation in profiting by the
kindness of Mr. Fogg.

"It's certain," thought he, "though rascal as he is, he is a polite
one!"

The sails and the English flag were hoisted at ten minutes past three.
Mr. Fogg and Aouda, who were seated on deck, cast a last glance at the
quay, in the hope of espying Passepartout.  Fix was not without his
fears lest chance should direct the steps of the unfortunate servant,
whom he had so badly treated, in this direction; in which case an
explanation the reverse of satisfactory to the detective must have
ensued.  But the Frenchman did not appear, and, without doubt, was
still lying under the stupefying influence of the opium.

John Bunsby, master, at length gave the order to start, and the
Tankadere, taking the wind under her brigantine, foresail, and
standing-jib, bounded briskly forward over the waves.




Chapter XXI

IN WHICH THE MASTER OF THE "TANKADERE" RUNS GREAT RISK OF LOSING A
REWARD OF TWO HUNDRED POUNDS


This voyage of eight hundred miles was a perilous venture on a craft of
twenty tons, and at that season of the year.  The Chinese seas are
usually boisterous, subject to terrible gales of wind, and especially
during the equinoxes; and it was now early November.

It would clearly have been to the master's advantage to carry his
passengers to Yokohama, since he was paid a certain sum per day; but he
would have been rash to attempt such a voyage, and it was imprudent
even to attempt to reach Shanghai.  But John Bunsby believed in the
Tankadere, which rode on the waves like a seagull; and perhaps he was
not wrong.

Late in the day they passed through the capricious channels of Hong
Kong, and the Tankadere, impelled by favourable winds, conducted
herself admirably.

"I do not need, pilot," said Phileas Fogg, when they got into the open
sea, "to advise you to use all possible speed."

"Trust me, your honour.  We are carrying all the sail the wind will let
us.  The poles would add nothing, and are only used when we are going
into port."

"It's your trade, not mine, pilot, and I confide in you."

Phileas Fogg, with body erect and legs wide apart, standing like a
sailor, gazed without staggering at the swelling waters.  The young
woman, who was seated aft, was profoundly affected as she looked out
upon the ocean, darkening now with the twilight, on which she had
ventured in so frail a vessel.  Above her head rustled the white sails,
which seemed like great white wings.  The boat, carried forward by the
wind, seemed to be flying in the air.

Night came.  The moon was entering her first quarter, and her
insufficient light would soon die out in the mist on the horizon.
Clouds were rising from the east, and already overcast a part of the
heavens.

The pilot had hung out his lights, which was very necessary in these
seas crowded with vessels bound landward; for collisions are not
uncommon occurrences, and, at the speed she was going, the least shock
would shatter the gallant little craft.

Fix, seated in the bow, gave himself up to meditation.  He kept apart
from his fellow-travellers, knowing Mr. Fogg's taciturn tastes;
besides, he did not quite like to talk to the man whose favours he had
accepted.  He was thinking, too, of the future.  It seemed certain that
Fogg would not stop at Yokohama, but would at once take the boat for
San Francisco; and the vast extent of America would ensure him impunity
and safety.  Fogg's plan appeared to him the simplest in the world.
Instead of sailing directly from England to the United States, like a
common villain, he had traversed three quarters of the globe, so as to
gain the American continent more surely; and there, after throwing the
police off his track, he would quietly enjoy himself with the fortune
stolen from the bank.  But, once in the United States, what should he,
Fix, do?  Should he abandon this man?  No, a hundred times no!  Until
he had secured his extradition, he would not lose sight of him for an
hour.  It was his duty, and he would fulfil it to the end.  At all
events, there was one thing to be thankful for; Passepartout was not
with his master; and it was above all important, after the confidences
Fix had imparted to him, that the servant should never have speech with
his master.

Phileas Fogg was also thinking of Passepartout, who had so strangely
disappeared.  Looking at the matter from every point of view, it did
not seem to him impossible that, by some mistake, the man might have
embarked on the Carnatic at the last moment; and this was also Aouda's
opinion, who regretted very much the loss of the worthy fellow to whom
she owed so much.  They might then find him at Yokohama; for, if the
Carnatic was carrying him thither, it would be easy to ascertain if he
had been on board.

A brisk breeze arose about ten o'clock; but, though it might have been
prudent to take in a reef, the pilot, after carefully examining the
heavens, let the craft remain rigged as before.  The Tankadere bore
sail admirably, as she drew a great deal of water, and everything was
prepared for high speed in case of a gale.

Mr. Fogg and Aouda descended into the cabin at midnight, having been
already preceded by Fix, who had lain down on one of the cots.  The
pilot and crew remained on deck all night.

At sunrise the next day, which was 8th November, the boat had made more
than one hundred miles.  The log indicated a mean speed of between
eight and nine miles.  The Tankadere still carried all sail, and was
accomplishing her greatest capacity of speed.  If the wind held as it
was, the chances would be in her favour.  During the day she kept along
the coast, where the currents were favourable; the coast, irregular in
profile, and visible sometimes across the clearings, was at most five
miles distant.  The sea was less boisterous, since the wind came off
land--a fortunate circumstance for the boat, which would suffer, owing
to its small tonnage, by a heavy surge on the sea.

The breeze subsided a little towards noon, and set in from the
south-west.  The pilot put up his poles, but took them down again
within two hours, as the wind freshened up anew.

Mr. Fogg and Aouda, happily unaffected by the roughness of the sea, ate
with a good appetite, Fix being invited to share their repast, which he
accepted with secret chagrin.  To travel at this man's expense and live
upon his provisions was not palatable to him.  Still, he was obliged to
eat, and so he ate.

When the meal was over, he took Mr. Fogg apart, and said, "sir"--this
"sir" scorched his lips, and he had to control himself to avoid
collaring this "gentleman"--"sir, you have been very kind to give me a
passage on this boat.  But, though my means will not admit of my
expending them as freely as you, I must ask to pay my share--"

"Let us not speak of that, sir," replied Mr. Fogg.

"But, if I insist--"

"No, sir," repeated Mr. Fogg, in a tone which did not admit of a reply.
"This enters into my general expenses."

Fix, as he bowed, had a stifled feeling, and, going forward, where he
ensconced himself, did not open his mouth for the rest of the day.

Meanwhile they were progressing famously, and John Bunsby was in high
hope.  He several times assured Mr. Fogg that they would reach Shanghai
in time; to which that gentleman responded that he counted upon it.
The crew set to work in good earnest, inspired by the reward to be
gained.  There was not a sheet which was not tightened, not a sail which
was not vigorously hoisted; not a lurch could be charged to the man at
the helm.  They worked as desperately as if they were contesting in a
Royal yacht regatta.

By evening, the log showed that two hundred and twenty miles had been
accomplished from Hong Kong, and Mr. Fogg might hope that he would be
able to reach Yokohama without recording any delay in his journal; in
which case, the many misadventures which had overtaken him since he
left London would not seriously affect his journey.

The Tankadere entered the Straits of Fo-Kien, which separate the island
of Formosa from the Chinese coast, in the small hours of the night, and
crossed the Tropic of Cancer.  The sea was very rough in the straits,
full of eddies formed by the counter-currents, and the chopping waves
broke her course, whilst it became very difficult to stand on deck.

At daybreak the wind began to blow hard again, and the heavens seemed
to predict a gale.  The barometer announced a speedy change, the
mercury rising and falling capriciously; the sea also, in the
south-east, raised long surges which indicated a tempest.  The sun had
set the evening before in a red mist, in the midst of the
phosphorescent scintillations of the ocean.

John Bunsby long examined the threatening aspect of the heavens,
muttering indistinctly between his teeth.  At last he said in a low
voice to Mr. Fogg, "Shall I speak out to your honour?"

"Of course."

"Well, we are going to have a squall."

"Is the wind north or south?" asked Mr. Fogg quietly.

"South.  Look! a typhoon is coming up."

"Glad it's a typhoon from the south, for it will carry us forward."

"Oh, if you take it that way," said John Bunsby, "I've nothing more to
say." John Bunsby's suspicions were confirmed.  At a less advanced
season of the year the typhoon, according to a famous meteorologist,
would have passed away like a luminous cascade of electric flame; but
in the winter equinox it was to be feared that it would burst upon them
with great violence.

The pilot took his precautions in advance.  He reefed all sail, the
pole-masts were dispensed with; all hands went forward to the bows.  A
single triangular sail, of strong canvas, was hoisted as a storm-jib,
so as to hold the wind from behind.  Then they waited.

John Bunsby had requested his passengers to go below; but this
imprisonment in so narrow a space, with little air, and the boat
bouncing in the gale, was far from pleasant.  Neither Mr. Fogg, Fix,
nor Aouda consented to leave the deck.

The storm of rain and wind descended upon them towards eight o'clock.
With but its bit of sail, the Tankadere was lifted like a feather by a
wind, an idea of whose violence can scarcely be given.  To compare her
speed to four times that of a locomotive going on full steam would be
below the truth.

The boat scudded thus northward during the whole day, borne on by
monstrous waves, preserving always, fortunately, a speed equal to
theirs.  Twenty times she seemed almost to be submerged by these
mountains of water which rose behind her; but the adroit management of
the pilot saved her.  The passengers were often bathed in spray, but
they submitted to it philosophically.  Fix cursed it, no doubt; but
Aouda, with her eyes fastened upon her protector, whose coolness amazed
her, showed herself worthy of him, and bravely weathered the storm.  As
for Phileas Fogg, it seemed just as if the typhoon were a part of his
programme.

Up to this time the Tankadere had always held her course to the north;
but towards evening the wind, veering three quarters, bore down from
the north-west.  The boat, now lying in the trough of the waves, shook
and rolled terribly; the sea struck her with fearful violence.  At
night the tempest increased in violence.  John Bunsby saw the approach
of darkness and the rising of the storm with dark misgivings.  He
thought awhile, and then asked his crew if it was not time to slacken
speed.  After a consultation he approached Mr. Fogg, and said, "I
think, your honour, that we should do well to make for one of the ports
on the coast."

"I think so too."

"Ah!" said the pilot.  "But which one?"

"I know of but one," returned Mr. Fogg tranquilly.

"And that is--"

"Shanghai."

The pilot, at first, did not seem to comprehend; he could scarcely
realise so much determination and tenacity.  Then he cried, "Well--yes!
Your honour is right.  To Shanghai!"

So the Tankadere kept steadily on her northward track.

The night was really terrible; it would be a miracle if the craft did
not founder.  Twice it could have been all over with her if the crew
had not been constantly on the watch.  Aouda was exhausted, but did not
utter a complaint.  More than once Mr. Fogg rushed to protect her from
the violence of the waves.

Day reappeared.  The tempest still raged with undiminished fury; but
the wind now returned to the south-east.  It was a favourable change,
and the Tankadere again bounded forward on this mountainous sea, though
the waves crossed each other, and imparted shocks and counter-shocks
which would have crushed a craft less solidly built.  From time to time
the coast was visible through the broken mist, but no vessel was in
sight.  The Tankadere was alone upon the sea.

There were some signs of a calm at noon, and these became more distinct
as the sun descended toward the horizon.  The tempest had been as brief
as terrific.  The passengers, thoroughly exhausted, could now eat a
little, and take some repose.

The night was comparatively quiet.  Some of the sails were again
hoisted, and the speed of the boat was very good.  The next morning at
dawn they espied the coast, and John Bunsby was able to assert that
they were not one hundred miles from Shanghai.  A hundred miles, and
only one day to traverse them!  That very evening Mr. Fogg was due at
Shanghai, if he did not wish to miss the steamer to Yokohama.  Had
there been no storm, during which several hours were lost, they would
be at this moment within thirty miles of their destination.

The wind grew decidedly calmer, and happily the sea fell with it.  All
sails were now hoisted, and at noon the Tankadere was within forty-five
miles of Shanghai.  There remained yet six hours in which to accomplish
that distance.  All on board feared that it could not be done, and
every one--Phileas Fogg, no doubt, excepted--felt his heart beat with
impatience.  The boat must keep up an average of nine miles an hour,
and the wind was becoming calmer every moment!  It was a capricious
breeze, coming from the coast, and after it passed the sea became
smooth.  Still, the Tankadere was so light, and her fine sails caught
the fickle zephyrs so well, that, with the aid of the currents John
Bunsby found himself at six o'clock not more than ten miles from the
mouth of Shanghai River.  Shanghai itself is situated at least twelve
miles up the stream.  At seven they were still three miles from
Shanghai.  The pilot swore an angry oath; the reward of two hundred
pounds was evidently on the point of escaping him.  He looked at Mr.
Fogg.  Mr. Fogg was perfectly tranquil; and yet his whole fortune was
at this moment at stake.

At this moment, also, a long black funnel, crowned with wreaths of
smoke, appeared on the edge of the waters.  It was the American
steamer, leaving for Yokohama at the appointed time.

"Confound her!" cried John Bunsby, pushing back the rudder with a
desperate jerk.

"Signal her!" said Phileas Fogg quietly.

A small brass cannon stood on the forward deck of the Tankadere, for
making signals in the fogs.  It was loaded to the muzzle; but just as
the pilot was about to apply a red-hot coal to the touchhole, Mr. Fogg
said, "Hoist your flag!"

The flag was run up at half-mast, and, this being the signal of
distress, it was hoped that the American steamer, perceiving it, would
change her course a little, so as to succour the pilot-boat.

"Fire!" said Mr. Fogg.  And the booming of the little cannon resounded
in the air.




Chapter XXII

IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT FINDS OUT THAT, EVEN AT THE ANTIPODES, IT IS
CONVENIENT TO HAVE SOME MONEY IN ONE'S POCKET


The Carnatic, setting sail from Hong Kong at half-past six on the 7th
of November, directed her course at full steam towards Japan.  She
carried a large cargo and a well-filled cabin of passengers.  Two
state-rooms in the rear were, however, unoccupied--those which had been
engaged by Phileas Fogg.

The next day a passenger with a half-stupefied eye, staggering gait,
and disordered hair, was seen to emerge from the second cabin, and to
totter to a seat on deck.

It was Passepartout; and what had happened to him was as follows:
Shortly after Fix left the opium den, two waiters had lifted the
unconscious Passepartout, and had carried him to the bed reserved for
the smokers.  Three hours later, pursued even in his dreams by a fixed
idea, the poor fellow awoke, and struggled against the stupefying
influence of the narcotic.  The thought of a duty unfulfilled shook off
his torpor, and he hurried from the abode of drunkenness.  Staggering
and holding himself up by keeping against the walls, falling down and
creeping up again, and irresistibly impelled by a kind of instinct, he
kept crying out, "The Carnatic! the Carnatic!"

The steamer lay puffing alongside the quay, on the point of starting.
Passepartout had but few steps to go; and, rushing upon the plank, he
crossed it, and fell unconscious on the deck, just as the Carnatic was
moving off.  Several sailors, who were evidently accustomed to this
sort of scene, carried the poor Frenchman down into the second cabin,
and Passepartout did not wake until they were one hundred and fifty
miles away from China.  Thus he found himself the next morning on the
deck of the Carnatic, and eagerly inhaling the exhilarating sea-breeze.
The pure air sobered him.  He began to collect his sense, which he
found a difficult task; but at last he recalled the events of the
evening before, Fix's revelation, and the opium-house.

"It is evident," said he to himself, "that I have been abominably
drunk!  What will Mr. Fogg say?  At least I have not missed the
steamer, which is the most important thing."

Then, as Fix occurred to him: "As for that rascal, I hope we are well
rid of him, and that he has not dared, as he proposed, to follow us on
board the Carnatic.  A detective on the track of Mr. Fogg, accused of
robbing the Bank of England!  Pshaw!  Mr. Fogg is no more a robber than
I am a murderer."

Should he divulge Fix's real errand to his master?  Would it do to tell
the part the detective was playing?  Would it not be better to wait
until Mr. Fogg reached London again, and then impart to him that an
agent of the metropolitan police had been following him round the
world, and have a good laugh over it?  No doubt; at least, it was worth
considering.  The first thing to do was to find Mr. Fogg, and apologise
for his singular behaviour.

Passepartout got up and proceeded, as well as he could with the rolling
of the steamer, to the after-deck.  He saw no one who resembled either
his master or Aouda.  "Good!"  muttered he; "Aouda has not got up yet,
and Mr. Fogg has probably found some partners at whist."

He descended to the saloon.  Mr. Fogg was not there.  Passepartout had
only, however, to ask the purser the number of his master's state-room.
The purser replied that he did not know any passenger by the name of
Fogg.

"I beg your pardon," said Passepartout persistently.  "He is a tall
gentleman, quiet, and not very talkative, and has with him a young
lady--"

"There is no young lady on board," interrupted the purser.  "Here is a
list of the passengers; you may see for yourself."

Passepartout scanned the list, but his master's name was not upon it.
All at once an idea struck him.

"Ah! am I on the Carnatic?"

"Yes."

"On the way to Yokohama?"

"Certainly."

Passepartout had for an instant feared that he was on the wrong boat;
but, though he was really on the Carnatic, his master was not there.

He fell thunderstruck on a seat.  He saw it all now.  He remembered
that the time of sailing had been changed, that he should have informed
his master of that fact, and that he had not done so.  It was his
fault, then, that Mr. Fogg and Aouda had missed the steamer.  Yes, but
it was still more the fault of the traitor who, in order to separate
him from his master, and detain the latter at Hong Kong, had inveigled
him into getting drunk!  He now saw the detective's trick; and at this
moment Mr. Fogg was certainly ruined, his bet was lost, and he himself
perhaps arrested and imprisoned!  At this thought Passepartout tore his
hair.  Ah, if Fix ever came within his reach, what a settling of
accounts there would be!

After his first depression, Passepartout became calmer, and began to
study his situation.  It was certainly not an enviable one.  He found
himself on the way to Japan, and what should he do when he got there?
His pocket was empty; he had not a solitary shilling, not so much as a
penny.  His passage had fortunately been paid for in advance; and he
had five or six days in which to decide upon his future course.  He
fell to at meals with an appetite, and ate for Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and
himself.  He helped himself as generously as if Japan were a desert,
where nothing to eat was to be looked for.

At dawn on the 13th the Carnatic entered the port of Yokohama.  This is
an important port of call in the Pacific, where all the mail-steamers,
and those carrying travellers between North America, China, Japan, and
the Oriental islands put in.  It is situated in the bay of Yeddo, and
at but a short distance from that second capital of the Japanese
Empire, and the residence of the Tycoon, the civil Emperor, before the
Mikado, the spiritual Emperor, absorbed his office in his own.  The
Carnatic anchored at the quay near the custom-house, in the midst of a
crowd of ships bearing the flags of all nations.

Passepartout went timidly ashore on this so curious territory of the
Sons of the Sun.  He had nothing better to do than, taking chance for
his guide, to wander aimlessly through the streets of Yokohama.  He
found himself at first in a thoroughly European quarter, the houses
having low fronts, and being adorned with verandas, beneath which he
caught glimpses of neat peristyles.  This quarter occupied, with its
streets, squares, docks, and warehouses, all the space between the
"promontory of the Treaty" and the river.  Here, as at Hong Kong and
Calcutta, were mixed crowds of all races, Americans and English,
Chinamen and Dutchmen, mostly merchants ready to buy or sell anything.
The Frenchman felt himself as much alone among them as if he had
dropped down in the midst of Hottentots.

He had, at least, one resource,--to call on the French and English
consuls at Yokohama for assistance.  But he shrank from telling the
story of his adventures, intimately connected as it was with that of
his master; and, before doing so, he determined to exhaust all other
means of aid.  As chance did not favour him in the European quarter, he
penetrated that inhabited by the native Japanese, determined, if
necessary, to push on to Yeddo.

The Japanese quarter of Yokohama is called Benten, after the goddess of
the sea, who is worshipped on the islands round about.  There
Passepartout beheld beautiful fir and cedar groves, sacred gates of a
singular architecture, bridges half hid in the midst of bamboos and
reeds, temples shaded by immense cedar-trees, holy retreats where were
sheltered Buddhist priests and sectaries of Confucius, and interminable
streets, where a perfect harvest of rose-tinted and red-cheeked
children, who looked as if they had been cut out of Japanese screens,
and who were playing in the midst of short-legged poodles and yellowish
cats, might have been gathered.

The streets were crowded with people.  Priests were passing in
processions, beating their dreary tambourines; police and custom-house
officers with pointed hats encrusted with lac and carrying two sabres
hung to their waists; soldiers, clad in blue cotton with white stripes,
and bearing guns; the Mikado's guards, enveloped in silken doubles,
hauberks and coats of mail; and numbers of military folk of all
ranks--for the military profession is as much respected in Japan as it
is despised in China--went hither and thither in groups and pairs.
Passepartout saw, too, begging friars, long-robed pilgrims, and simple
civilians, with their warped and jet-black hair, big heads, long busts,
slender legs, short stature, and complexions varying from copper-colour
to a dead white, but never yellow, like the Chinese, from whom the
Japanese widely differ.  He did not fail to observe the curious
equipages--carriages and palanquins, barrows supplied with sails, and
litters made of bamboo; nor the women--whom he thought not especially
handsome--who took little steps with their little feet, whereon they
wore canvas shoes, straw sandals, and clogs of worked wood, and who
displayed tight-looking eyes, flat chests, teeth fashionably blackened,
and gowns crossed with silken scarfs, tied in an enormous knot behind
an ornament which the modern Parisian ladies seem to have borrowed from
the dames of Japan.

Passepartout wandered for several hours in the midst of this motley
crowd, looking in at the windows of the rich and curious shops, the
jewellery establishments glittering with quaint Japanese ornaments, the
restaurants decked with streamers and banners, the tea-houses, where
the odorous beverage was being drunk with saki, a liquor concocted from
the fermentation of rice, and the comfortable smoking-houses, where
they were puffing, not opium, which is almost unknown in Japan, but a
very fine, stringy tobacco.  He went on till he found himself in the
fields, in the midst of vast rice plantations.  There he saw dazzling
camellias expanding themselves, with flowers which were giving forth
their last colours and perfumes, not on bushes, but on trees, and
within bamboo enclosures, cherry, plum, and apple trees, which the
Japanese cultivate rather for their blossoms than their fruit, and
which queerly-fashioned, grinning scarecrows protected from the
sparrows, pigeons, ravens, and other voracious birds.  On the branches
of the cedars were perched large eagles; amid the foliage of the
weeping willows were herons, solemnly standing on one leg; and on every
hand were crows, ducks, hawks, wild birds, and a multitude of cranes,
which the Japanese consider sacred, and which to their minds symbolise
long life and prosperity.

As he was strolling along, Passepartout espied some violets among the
shrubs.

"Good!" said he; "I'll have some supper."

But, on smelling them, he found that they were odourless.

"No chance there," thought he.

The worthy fellow had certainly taken good care to eat as hearty a
breakfast as possible before leaving the Carnatic; but, as he had been
walking about all day, the demands of hunger were becoming importunate.
He observed that the butchers stalls contained neither mutton, goat,
nor pork; and, knowing also that it is a sacrilege to kill cattle,
which are preserved solely for farming, he made up his mind that meat
was far from plentiful in Yokohama--nor was he mistaken; and, in
default of butcher's meat, he could have wished for a quarter of wild
boar or deer, a partridge, or some quails, some game or fish, which,
with rice, the Japanese eat almost exclusively.  But he found it
necessary to keep up a stout heart, and to postpone the meal he craved
till the following morning.  Night came, and Passepartout re-entered
the native quarter, where he wandered through the streets, lit by
vari-coloured lanterns, looking on at the dancers, who were executing
skilful steps and boundings, and the astrologers who stood in the open
air with their telescopes.  Then he came to the harbour, which was lit
up by the resin torches of the fishermen, who were fishing from their
boats.

The streets at last became quiet, and the patrol, the officers of
which, in their splendid costumes, and surrounded by their suites,
Passepartout thought seemed like ambassadors, succeeded the bustling
crowd.  Each time a company passed, Passepartout chuckled, and said to
himself: "Good! another Japanese embassy departing for Europe!"




Chapter XXIII

IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT'S NOSE BECOMES OUTRAGEOUSLY LONG


The next morning poor, jaded, famished Passepartout said to himself
that he must get something to eat at all hazards, and the sooner he did
so the better.  He might, indeed, sell his watch; but he would have
starved first.  Now or never he must use the strong, if not melodious
voice which nature had bestowed upon him.  He knew several French and
English songs, and resolved to try them upon the Japanese, who must be
lovers of music, since they were for ever pounding on their cymbals,
tam-tams, and tambourines, and could not but appreciate European talent.

It was, perhaps, rather early in the morning to get up a concert, and
the audience prematurely aroused from their slumbers, might not
possibly pay their entertainer with coin bearing the Mikado's features.
Passepartout therefore decided to wait several hours; and, as he was
sauntering along, it occurred to him that he would seem rather too well
dressed for a wandering artist.  The idea struck him to change his
garments for clothes more in harmony with his project; by which he
might also get a little money to satisfy the immediate cravings of
hunger.  The resolution taken, it remained to carry it out.

It was only after a long search that Passepartout discovered a native
dealer in old clothes, to whom he applied for an exchange.  The man
liked the European costume, and ere long Passepartout issued from his
shop accoutred in an old Japanese coat, and a sort of one-sided turban,
faded with long use.  A few small pieces of silver, moreover, jingled
in his pocket.

"Good!" thought he.  "I will imagine I am at the Carnival!"

His first care, after being thus "Japanesed," was to enter a tea-house
of modest appearance, and, upon half a bird and a little rice, to
breakfast like a man for whom dinner was as yet a problem to be solved.

"Now," thought he, when he had eaten heartily, "I mustn't lose my head.
I can't sell this costume again for one still more Japanese.  I must
consider how to leave this country of the Sun, of which I shall not
retain the most delightful of memories, as quickly as possible."

It occurred to him to visit the steamers which were about to leave for
America.  He would offer himself as a cook or servant, in payment of
his passage and meals.  Once at San Francisco, he would find some means
of going on.  The difficulty was, how to traverse the four thousand
seven hundred miles of the Pacific which lay between Japan and the New
World.

Passepartout was not the man to let an idea go begging, and directed
his steps towards the docks.  But, as he approached them, his project,
which at first had seemed so simple, began to grow more and more
formidable to his mind.  What need would they have of a cook or servant
on an American steamer, and what confidence would they put in him,
dressed as he was?  What references could he give?

As he was reflecting in this wise, his eyes fell upon an immense
placard which a sort of clown was carrying through the streets.  This
placard, which was in English, read as follows:

          ACROBATIC JAPANESE TROUPE,
   HONOURABLE WILLIAM BATULCAR, PROPRIETOR,
           LAST REPRESENTATIONS,
PRIOR TO THEIR DEPARTURE TO THE UNITED STATES,
                  OF THE
        LONG NOSES!   LONG NOSES!
UNDER THE DIRECT PATRONAGE OF THE GOD TINGOU!
           GREAT ATTRACTION!

"The United States!" said Passepartout; "that's just what I want!"

He followed the clown, and soon found himself once more in the Japanese
quarter.  A quarter of an hour later he stopped before a large cabin,
adorned with several clusters of streamers, the exterior walls of which
were designed to represent, in violent colours and without perspective,
a company of jugglers.

This was the Honourable William Batulcar's establishment.  That
gentleman was a sort of Barnum, the director of a troupe of
mountebanks, jugglers, clowns, acrobats, equilibrists, and gymnasts,
who, according to the placard, was giving his last performances before
leaving the Empire of the Sun for the States of the Union.

Passepartout entered and asked for Mr. Batulcar, who straightway
appeared in person.

"What do you want?" said he to Passepartout, whom he at first took for
a native.

"Would you like a servant, sir?" asked Passepartout.

"A servant!" cried Mr. Batulcar, caressing the thick grey beard which
hung from his chin.  "I already have two who are obedient and faithful,
have never left me, and serve me for their nourishment and here they
are," added he, holding out his two robust arms, furrowed with veins as
large as the strings of a bass-viol.

"So I can be of no use to you?"

"None."

"The devil!  I should so like to cross the Pacific with you!"

"Ah!" said the Honourable Mr. Batulcar.  "You are no more a Japanese
than I am a monkey!  Who are you dressed up in that way?"

"A man dresses as he can."

"That's true.  You are a Frenchman, aren't you?"

"Yes; a Parisian of Paris."

"Then you ought to know how to make grimaces?"

"Why," replied Passepartout, a little vexed that his nationality should
cause this question, "we Frenchmen know how to make grimaces, it is
true but not any better than the Americans do."

"True.  Well, if I can't take you as a servant, I can as a clown.  You
see, my friend, in France they exhibit foreign clowns, and in foreign
parts French clowns."

"Ah!"

"You are pretty strong, eh?"

"Especially after a good meal."

"And you can sing?"

"Yes," returned Passepartout, who had formerly been wont to sing in the
streets.

"But can you sing standing on your head, with a top spinning on your
left foot, and a sabre balanced on your right?"

"Humph!  I think so," replied Passepartout, recalling the exercises of
his younger days.

"Well, that's enough," said the Honourable William Batulcar.

The engagement was concluded there and then.

Passepartout had at last found something to do.  He was engaged to act
in the celebrated Japanese troupe.  It was not a very dignified
position, but within a week he would be on his way to San Francisco.

The performance, so noisily announced by the Honourable Mr. Batulcar,
was to commence at three o'clock, and soon the deafening instruments of
a Japanese orchestra resounded at the door.  Passepartout, though he
had not been able to study or rehearse a part, was designated to lend
the aid of his sturdy shoulders in the great exhibition of the "human
pyramid," executed by the Long Noses of the god Tingou.  This "great
attraction" was to close the performance.

Before three o'clock the large shed was invaded by the spectators,
comprising Europeans and natives, Chinese and Japanese, men, women and
children, who precipitated themselves upon the narrow benches and into
the boxes opposite the stage.  The musicians took up a position inside,
and were vigorously performing on their gongs, tam-tams, flutes, bones,
tambourines, and immense drums.

The performance was much like all acrobatic displays; but it must be
confessed that the Japanese are the first equilibrists in the world.

One, with a fan and some bits of paper, performed the graceful trick of
the butterflies and the flowers; another traced in the air, with the
odorous smoke of his pipe, a series of blue words, which composed a
compliment to the audience; while a third juggled with some lighted
candles, which he extinguished successively as they passed his lips,
and relit again without interrupting for an instant his juggling.
Another reproduced the most singular combinations with a spinning-top;
in his hands the revolving tops seemed to be animated with a life of
their own in their interminable whirling; they ran over pipe-stems, the
edges of sabres, wires and even hairs stretched across the stage; they
turned around on the edges of large glasses, crossed bamboo ladders,
dispersed into all the corners, and produced strange musical effects by
the combination of their various pitches of tone.  The jugglers tossed
them in the air, threw them like shuttlecocks with wooden battledores,
and yet they kept on spinning; they put them into their pockets, and
took them out still whirling as before.

It is useless to describe the astonishing performances of the acrobats
and gymnasts.  The turning on ladders, poles, balls, barrels, &c., was
executed with wonderful precision.

But the principal attraction was the exhibition of the Long Noses, a
show to which Europe is as yet a stranger.

The Long Noses form a peculiar company, under the direct patronage of
the god Tingou.  Attired after the fashion of the Middle Ages, they
bore upon their shoulders a splendid pair of wings; but what especially
distinguished them was the long noses which were fastened to their
faces, and the uses which they made of them.  These noses were made of
bamboo, and were five, six, and even ten feet long, some straight,
others curved, some ribboned, and some having imitation warts upon
them.  It was upon these appendages, fixed tightly on their real noses,
that they performed their gymnastic exercises.  A dozen of these
sectaries of Tingou lay flat upon their backs, while others, dressed to
represent lightning-rods, came and frolicked on their noses, jumping
from one to another, and performing the most skilful leapings and
somersaults.

As a last scene, a "human pyramid" had been announced, in which fifty
Long Noses were to represent the Car of Juggernaut.  But, instead of
forming a pyramid by mounting each other's shoulders, the artists were
to group themselves on top of the noses.  It happened that the
performer who had hitherto formed the base of the Car had quitted the
troupe, and as, to fill this part, only strength and adroitness were
necessary, Passepartout had been chosen to take his place.

The poor fellow really felt sad when--melancholy reminiscence of his
youth!--he donned his costume, adorned with vari-coloured wings, and
fastened to his natural feature a false nose six feet long.  But he
cheered up when he thought that this nose was winning him something to
eat.

He went upon the stage, and took his place beside the rest who were to
compose the base of the Car of Juggernaut.  They all stretched
themselves on the floor, their noses pointing to the ceiling.  A second
group of artists disposed themselves on these long appendages, then a
third above these, then a fourth, until a human monument reaching to
the very cornices of the theatre soon arose on top of the noses.  This
elicited loud applause, in the midst of which the orchestra was just
striking up a deafening air, when the pyramid tottered, the balance was
lost, one of the lower noses vanished from the pyramid, and the human
monument was shattered like a castle built of cards!

It was Passepartout's fault.  Abandoning his position, clearing the
footlights without the aid of his wings, and, clambering up to the
right-hand gallery, he fell at the feet of one of the spectators,
crying, "Ah, my master! my master!"

"You here?"

"Myself."

"Very well; then let us go to the steamer, young man!"

Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout passed through the lobby of the
theatre to the outside, where they encountered the Honourable Mr.
Batulcar, furious with rage.  He demanded damages for the "breakage" of
the pyramid; and Phileas Fogg appeased him by giving him a handful of
banknotes.

At half-past six, the very hour of departure, Mr. Fogg and Aouda,
followed by Passepartout, who in his hurry had retained his wings, and
nose six feet long, stepped upon the American steamer.




Chapter XXIV

DURING WHICH MR. FOGG AND PARTY CROSS THE PACIFIC OCEAN


What happened when the pilot-boat came in sight of Shanghai will be
easily guessed.  The signals made by the Tankadere had been seen by the
captain of the Yokohama steamer, who, espying the flag at half-mast,
had directed his course towards the little craft.  Phileas Fogg, after
paying the stipulated price of his passage to John Busby, and rewarding
that worthy with the additional sum of five hundred and fifty pounds,
ascended the steamer with Aouda and Fix; and they started at once for
Nagasaki and Yokohama.

They reached their destination on the morning of the 14th of November.
Phileas Fogg lost no time in going on board the Carnatic, where he
learned, to Aouda's great delight--and perhaps to his own, though he
betrayed no emotion--that Passepartout, a Frenchman, had really arrived
on her the day before.

The San Francisco steamer was announced to leave that very evening, and
it became necessary to find Passepartout, if possible, without delay.
Mr. Fogg applied in vain to the French and English consuls, and, after
wandering through the streets a long time, began to despair of finding
his missing servant.  Chance, or perhaps a kind of presentiment, at
last led him into the Honourable Mr. Batulcar's theatre.  He certainly
would not have recognised Passepartout in the eccentric mountebank's
costume; but the latter, lying on his back, perceived his master in the
gallery.  He could not help starting, which so changed the position of
his nose as to bring the "pyramid" pell-mell upon the stage.

All this Passepartout learned from Aouda, who recounted to him what had
taken place on the voyage from Hong Kong to Shanghai on the Tankadere,
in company with one Mr. Fix.

Passepartout did not change countenance on hearing this name.  He
thought that the time had not yet arrived to divulge to his master what
had taken place between the detective and himself; and, in the account
he gave of his absence, he simply excused himself for having been
overtaken by drunkenness, in smoking opium at a tavern in Hong Kong.

Mr. Fogg heard this narrative coldly, without a word; and then
furnished his man with funds necessary to obtain clothing more in
harmony with his position.  Within an hour the Frenchman had cut off
his nose and parted with his wings, and retained nothing about him
which recalled the sectary of the god Tingou.

The steamer which was about to depart from Yokohama to San Francisco
belonged to the Pacific Mail Steamship Company, and was named the
General Grant.  She was a large paddle-wheel steamer of two thousand
five hundred tons; well equipped and very fast.  The massive
walking-beam rose and fell above the deck; at one end a piston-rod
worked up and down; and at the other was a connecting-rod which, in
changing the rectilinear motion to a circular one, was directly
connected with the shaft of the paddles.  The General Grant was rigged
with three masts, giving a large capacity for sails, and thus
materially aiding the steam power.  By making twelve miles an hour, she
would cross the ocean in twenty-one days.  Phileas Fogg was therefore
justified in hoping that he would reach San Francisco by the 2nd of
December, New York by the 11th, and London on the 20th--thus gaining
several hours on the fatal date of the 21st of December.

There was a full complement of passengers on board, among them English,
many Americans, a large number of coolies on their way to California,
and several East Indian officers, who were spending their vacation in
making the tour of the world.  Nothing of moment happened on the
voyage; the steamer, sustained on its large paddles, rolled but little,
and the Pacific almost justified its name.  Mr. Fogg was as calm and
taciturn as ever.  His young companion felt herself more and more
attached to him by other ties than gratitude; his silent but generous
nature impressed her more than she thought; and it was almost
unconsciously that she yielded to emotions which did not seem to have
the least effect upon her protector.  Aouda took the keenest interest
in his plans, and became impatient at any incident which seemed likely
to retard his journey.

She often chatted with Passepartout, who did not fail to perceive the
state of the lady's heart; and, being the most faithful of domestics,
he never exhausted his eulogies of Phileas Fogg's honesty, generosity,
and devotion.  He took pains to calm Aouda's doubts of a successful
termination of the journey, telling her that the most difficult part of
it had passed, that now they were beyond the fantastic countries of
Japan and China, and were fairly on their way to civilised places
again.  A railway train from San Francisco to New York, and a
transatlantic steamer from New York to Liverpool, would doubtless bring
them to the end of this impossible journey round the world within the
period agreed upon.

On the ninth day after leaving Yokohama, Phileas Fogg had traversed
exactly one half of the terrestrial globe.  The General Grant passed,
on the 23rd of November, the one hundred and eightieth meridian, and
was at the very antipodes of London.  Mr. Fogg had, it is true,
exhausted fifty-two of the eighty days in which he was to complete the
tour, and there were only twenty-eight left.  But, though he was only
half-way by the difference of meridians, he had really gone over
two-thirds of the whole journey; for he had been obliged to make long
circuits from London to Aden, from Aden to Bombay, from Calcutta to
Singapore, and from Singapore to Yokohama.  Could he have followed
without deviation the fiftieth parallel, which is that of London, the
whole distance would only have been about twelve thousand miles;
whereas he would be forced, by the irregular methods of locomotion, to
traverse twenty-six thousand, of which he had, on the 23rd of November,
accomplished seventeen thousand five hundred.  And now the course was a
straight one, and Fix was no longer there to put obstacles in their way!

It happened also, on the 23rd of November, that Passepartout made a
joyful discovery.  It will be remembered that the obstinate fellow had
insisted on keeping his famous family watch at London time, and on
regarding that of the countries he had passed through as quite false
and unreliable.  Now, on this day, though he had not changed the hands,
he found that his watch exactly agreed with the ship's chronometers.
His triumph was hilarious.  He would have liked to know what Fix would
say if he were aboard!

"The rogue told me a lot of stories," repeated Passepartout, "about the
meridians, the sun, and the moon!  Moon, indeed!  moonshine more
likely!  If one listened to that sort of people, a pretty sort of time
one would keep!  I was sure that the sun would some day regulate itself
by my watch!"

Passepartout was ignorant that, if the face of his watch had been
divided into twenty-four hours, like the Italian clocks, he would have
no reason for exultation; for the hands of his watch would then,
instead of as now indicating nine o'clock in the morning, indicate nine
o'clock in the evening, that is, the twenty-first hour after midnight
precisely the difference between London time and that of the one
hundred and eightieth meridian.  But if Fix had been able to explain
this purely physical effect, Passepartout would not have admitted, even
if he had comprehended it.  Moreover, if the detective had been on
board at that moment, Passepartout would have joined issue with him on
a quite different subject, and in an entirely different manner.

Where was Fix at that moment?

He was actually on board the General Grant.

On reaching Yokohama, the detective, leaving Mr. Fogg, whom he expected
to meet again during the day, had repaired at once to the English
consulate, where he at last found the warrant of arrest.  It had
followed him from Bombay, and had come by the Carnatic, on which
steamer he himself was supposed to be.  Fix's disappointment may be
imagined when he reflected that the warrant was now useless.  Mr. Fogg
had left English ground, and it was now necessary to procure his
extradition!

"Well," thought Fix, after a moment of anger, "my warrant is not good
here, but it will be in England.  The rogue evidently intends to return
to his own country, thinking he has thrown the police off his track.
Good!  I will follow him across the Atlantic.  As for the money, heaven
grant there may be some left!  But the fellow has already spent in
travelling, rewards, trials, bail, elephants, and all sorts of charges,
more than five thousand pounds.  Yet, after all, the Bank is rich!"

His course decided on, he went on board the General Grant, and was
there when Mr. Fogg and Aouda arrived.  To his utter amazement, he
recognised Passepartout, despite his theatrical disguise.  He quickly
concealed himself in his cabin, to avoid an awkward explanation, and
hoped--thanks to the number of passengers--to remain unperceived by Mr.
Fogg's servant.

On that very day, however, he met Passepartout face to face on the
forward deck.  The latter, without a word, made a rush for him, grasped
him by the throat, and, much to the amusement of a group of Americans,
who immediately began to bet on him, administered to the detective a
perfect volley of blows, which proved the great superiority of French
over English pugilistic skill.

When Passepartout had finished, he found himself relieved and
comforted.  Fix got up in a somewhat rumpled condition, and, looking at
his adversary, coldly said, "Have you done?"

"For this time--yes."

"Then let me have a word with you."

"But I--"

"In your master's interests."

Passepartout seemed to be vanquished by Fix's coolness, for he quietly
followed him, and they sat down aside from the rest of the passengers.

"You have given me a thrashing," said Fix.  "Good, I expected it.  Now,
listen to me.  Up to this time I have been Mr. Fogg's adversary.  I am
now in his game."

"Aha!" cried Passepartout; "you are convinced he is an honest man?"

"No," replied Fix coldly, "I think him a rascal.  Sh! don't budge, and
let me speak.  As long as Mr. Fogg was on English ground, it was for my
interest to detain him there until my warrant of arrest arrived.  I did
everything I could to keep him back.  I sent the Bombay priests after
him, I got you intoxicated at Hong Kong, I separated you from him, and
I made him miss the Yokohama steamer."

Passepartout listened, with closed fists.

"Now," resumed Fix, "Mr. Fogg seems to be going back to England.  Well,
I will follow him there.  But hereafter I will do as much to keep
obstacles out of his way as I have done up to this time to put them in
his path.  I've changed my game, you see, and simply because it was for
my interest to change it.  Your interest is the same as mine; for it is
only in England that you will ascertain whether you are in the service
of a criminal or an honest man."

Passepartout listened very attentively to Fix, and was convinced that
he spoke with entire good faith.

"Are we friends?" asked the detective.

"Friends?--no," replied Passepartout; "but allies, perhaps.  At the
least sign of treason, however, I'll twist your neck for you."

"Agreed," said the detective quietly.

Eleven days later, on the 3rd of December, the General Grant entered
the bay of the Golden Gate, and reached San Francisco.

Mr. Fogg had neither gained nor lost a single day.




Chapter XXV

IN WHICH A SLIGHT GLIMPSE IS HAD OF SAN FRANCISCO


It was seven in the morning when Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout set
foot upon the American continent, if this name can be given to the
floating quay upon which they disembarked.  These quays, rising and
falling with the tide, thus facilitate the loading and unloading of
vessels.  Alongside them were clippers of all sizes, steamers of all
nationalities, and the steamboats, with several decks rising one above
the other, which ply on the Sacramento and its tributaries.  There were
also heaped up the products of a commerce which extends to Mexico,
Chili, Peru, Brazil, Europe, Asia, and all the Pacific islands.

Passepartout, in his joy on reaching at last the American continent,
thought he would manifest it by executing a perilous vault in fine
style; but, tumbling upon some worm-eaten planks, he fell through them.
Put out of countenance by the manner in which he thus "set foot" upon
the New World, he uttered a loud cry, which so frightened the
innumerable cormorants and pelicans that are always perched upon these
movable quays, that they flew noisily away.

Mr. Fogg, on reaching shore, proceeded to find out at what hour the
first train left for New York, and learned that this was at six o'clock
p.m.; he had, therefore, an entire day to spend in the Californian
capital.  Taking a carriage at a charge of three dollars, he and Aouda
entered it, while Passepartout mounted the box beside the driver, and
they set out for the International Hotel.

From his exalted position Passepartout observed with much curiosity the
wide streets, the low, evenly ranged houses, the Anglo-Saxon Gothic
churches, the great docks, the palatial wooden and brick warehouses,
the numerous conveyances, omnibuses, horse-cars, and upon the
side-walks, not only Americans and Europeans, but Chinese and Indians.
Passepartout was surprised at all he saw.  San Francisco was no longer
the legendary city of 1849--a city of banditti, assassins, and
incendiaries, who had flocked hither in crowds in pursuit of plunder; a
paradise of outlaws, where they gambled with gold-dust, a revolver in
one hand and a bowie-knife in the other: it was now a great commercial
emporium.

The lofty tower of its City Hall overlooked the whole panorama of the
streets and avenues, which cut each other at right-angles, and in the
midst of which appeared pleasant, verdant squares, while beyond
appeared the Chinese quarter, seemingly imported from the Celestial
Empire in a toy-box.  Sombreros and red shirts and plumed Indians were
rarely to be seen; but there were silk hats and black coats everywhere
worn by a multitude of nervously active, gentlemanly-looking men.  Some
of the streets--especially Montgomery Street, which is to San Francisco
what Regent Street is to London, the Boulevard des Italiens to Paris,
and Broadway to New York--were lined with splendid and spacious
stores, which exposed in their windows the products of the entire world.

When Passepartout reached the International Hotel, it did not seem to
him as if he had left England at all.

The ground floor of the hotel was occupied by a large bar, a sort of
restaurant freely open to all passers-by, who might partake of dried
beef, oyster soup, biscuits, and cheese, without taking out their
purses.  Payment was made only for the ale, porter, or sherry which was
drunk.  This seemed "very American" to Passepartout.  The hotel
refreshment-rooms were comfortable, and Mr. Fogg and Aouda, installing
themselves at a table, were abundantly served on diminutive plates by
negroes of darkest hue.

After breakfast, Mr. Fogg, accompanied by Aouda, started for the
English consulate to have his passport visaed.  As he was going out, he
met Passepartout, who asked him if it would not be well, before taking
the train, to purchase some dozens of Enfield rifles and Colt's
revolvers.  He had been listening to stories of attacks upon the trains
by the Sioux and Pawnees.  Mr. Fogg thought it a useless precaution,
but told him to do as he thought best, and went on to the consulate.

He had not proceeded two hundred steps, however, when, "by the greatest
chance in the world," he met Fix.  The detective seemed wholly taken by
surprise.  What!  Had Mr. Fogg and himself crossed the Pacific
together, and not met on the steamer!  At least Fix felt honoured to
behold once more the gentleman to whom he owed so much, and, as his
business recalled him to Europe, he should be delighted to continue the
journey in such pleasant company.

Mr. Fogg replied that the honour would be his; and the detective--who
was determined not to lose sight of him--begged permission to accompany
them in their walk about San Francisco--a request which Mr. Fogg
readily granted.

They soon found themselves in Montgomery Street, where a great crowd
was collected; the side-walks, street, horsecar rails, the shop-doors,
the windows of the houses, and even the roofs, were full of people.
Men were going about carrying large posters, and flags and streamers
were floating in the wind; while loud cries were heard on every hand.

"Hurrah for Camerfield!"

"Hurrah for Mandiboy!"

It was a political meeting; at least so Fix conjectured, who said to
Mr. Fogg, "Perhaps we had better not mingle with the crowd.  There may
be danger in it."

"Yes," returned Mr. Fogg; "and blows, even if they are political are
still blows."

Fix smiled at this remark; and, in order to be able to see without
being jostled about, the party took up a position on the top of a
flight of steps situated at the upper end of Montgomery Street.
Opposite them, on the other side of the street, between a coal wharf
and a petroleum warehouse, a large platform had been erected in the
open air, towards which the current of the crowd seemed to be directed.

For what purpose was this meeting?  What was the occasion of this
excited assemblage?  Phileas Fogg could not imagine.  Was it to
nominate some high official--a governor or member of Congress?  It was
not improbable, so agitated was the multitude before them.

Just at this moment there was an unusual stir in the human mass.  All
the hands were raised in the air.  Some, tightly closed, seemed to
disappear suddenly in the midst of the cries--an energetic way, no
doubt, of casting a vote.  The crowd swayed back, the banners and flags
wavered, disappeared an instant, then reappeared in tatters.  The
undulations of the human surge reached the steps, while all the heads
floundered on the surface like a sea agitated by a squall.  Many of the
black hats disappeared, and the greater part of the crowd seemed to
have diminished in height.

"It is evidently a meeting," said Fix, "and its object must be an
exciting one.  I should not wonder if it were about the Alabama,
despite the fact that that question is settled."

"Perhaps," replied Mr. Fogg, simply.

"At least, there are two champions in presence of each other, the
Honourable Mr. Camerfield and the Honourable Mr. Mandiboy."

Aouda, leaning upon Mr. Fogg's arm, observed the tumultuous scene with
surprise, while Fix asked a man near him what the cause of it all was.
Before the man could reply, a fresh agitation arose; hurrahs and
excited shouts were heard; the staffs of the banners began to be used
as offensive weapons; and fists flew about in every direction.  Thumps
were exchanged from the tops of the carriages and omnibuses which had
been blocked up in the crowd.  Boots and shoes went whirling through
the air, and Mr. Fogg thought he even heard the crack of revolvers
mingling in the din, the rout approached the stairway, and flowed over
the lower step.  One of the parties had evidently been repulsed; but
the mere lookers-on could not tell whether Mandiboy or Camerfield had
gained the upper hand.

"It would be prudent for us to retire," said Fix, who was anxious that
Mr. Fogg should not receive any injury, at least until they got back to
London.  "If there is any question about England in all this, and we
were recognised, I fear it would go hard with us."

"An English subject--" began Mr. Fogg.

He did not finish his sentence; for a terrific hubbub now arose on the
terrace behind the flight of steps where they stood, and there were
frantic shouts of, "Hurrah for Mandiboy!  Hip, hip, hurrah!"

It was a band of voters coming to the rescue of their allies, and
taking the Camerfield forces in flank.  Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Fix found
themselves between two fires; it was too late to escape.  The torrent
of men, armed with loaded canes and sticks, was irresistible.  Phileas
Fogg and Fix were roughly hustled in their attempts to protect their
fair companion; the former, as cool as ever, tried to defend himself
with the weapons which nature has placed at the end of every
Englishman's arm, but in vain.  A big brawny fellow with a red beard,
flushed face, and broad shoulders, who seemed to be the chief of the
band, raised his clenched fist to strike Mr. Fogg, whom he would have
given a crushing blow, had not Fix rushed in and received it in his
stead.  An enormous bruise immediately made its appearance under the
detective's silk hat, which was completely smashed in.

"Yankee!" exclaimed Mr. Fogg, darting a contemptuous look at the
ruffian.

"Englishman!" returned the other.  "We will meet again!"

"When you please."

"What is your name?"

"Phileas Fogg.  And yours?"

"Colonel Stamp Proctor."

The human tide now swept by, after overturning Fix, who speedily got
upon his feet again, though with tattered clothes.  Happily, he was not
seriously hurt.  His travelling overcoat was divided into two unequal
parts, and his trousers resembled those of certain Indians, which fit
less compactly than they are easy to put on.  Aouda had escaped
unharmed, and Fix alone bore marks of the fray in his black and blue
bruise.

"Thanks," said Mr. Fogg to the detective, as soon as they were out of
the crowd.

"No thanks are necessary," replied.  Fix; "but let us go."

"Where?"

"To a tailor's."

Such a visit was, indeed, opportune.  The clothing of both Mr. Fogg and
Fix was in rags, as if they had themselves been actively engaged in the
contest between Camerfield and Mandiboy.  An hour after, they were once
more suitably attired, and with Aouda returned to the International
Hotel.

Passepartout was waiting for his master, armed with half a dozen
six-barrelled revolvers.  When he perceived Fix, he knit his brows; but
Aouda having, in a few words, told him of their adventure, his
countenance resumed its placid expression.  Fix evidently was no longer
an enemy, but an ally; he was faithfully keeping his word.

Dinner over, the coach which was to convey the passengers and their
luggage to the station drew up to the door.  As he was getting in, Mr.
Fogg said to Fix, "You have not seen this Colonel Proctor again?"

"No."

"I will come back to America to find him," said Phileas Fogg calmly.
"It would not be right for an Englishman to permit himself to be
treated in that way, without retaliating."

The detective smiled, but did not reply.  It was clear that Mr. Fogg
was one of those Englishmen who, while they do not tolerate duelling at
home, fight abroad when their honour is attacked.

At a quarter before six the travellers reached the station, and found
the train ready to depart.  As he was about to enter it, Mr. Fogg
called a porter, and said to him: "My friend, was there not some
trouble to-day in San Francisco?"

"It was a political meeting, sir," replied the porter.

"But I thought there was a great deal of disturbance in the streets."

"It was only a meeting assembled for an election."

"The election of a general-in-chief, no doubt?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"No, sir; of a justice of the peace."

Phileas Fogg got into the train, which started off at full speed.




Chapter XXVI

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND PARTY TRAVEL BY THE PACIFIC RAILROAD


"From ocean to ocean"--so say the Americans; and these four words
compose the general designation of the "great trunk line" which crosses
the entire width of the United States.  The Pacific Railroad is,
however, really divided into two distinct lines: the Central Pacific,
between San Francisco and Ogden, and the Union Pacific, between Ogden
and Omaha.  Five main lines connect Omaha with New York.

New York and San Francisco are thus united by an uninterrupted metal
ribbon, which measures no less than three thousand seven hundred and
eighty-six miles.  Between Omaha and the Pacific the railway crosses a
territory which is still infested by Indians and wild beasts, and a
large tract which the Mormons, after they were driven from Illinois in
1845, began to colonise.

The journey from New York to San Francisco consumed, formerly, under
the most favourable conditions, at least six months.  It is now
accomplished in seven days.

It was in 1862 that, in spite of the Southern Members of Congress, who
wished a more southerly route, it was decided to lay the road between
the forty-first and forty-second parallels.  President Lincoln himself
fixed the end of the line at Omaha, in Nebraska.  The work was at once
commenced, and pursued with true American energy; nor did the rapidity
with which it went on injuriously affect its good execution.  The road
grew, on the prairies, a mile and a half a day.  A locomotive, running
on the rails laid down the evening before, brought the rails to be laid
on the morrow, and advanced upon them as fast as they were put in
position.

The Pacific Railroad is joined by several branches in Iowa, Kansas,
Colorado, and Oregon.  On leaving Omaha, it passes along the left bank
of the Platte River as far as the junction of its northern branch,
follows its southern branch, crosses the Laramie territory and the
Wahsatch Mountains, turns the Great Salt Lake, and reaches Salt Lake
City, the Mormon capital, plunges into the Tuilla Valley, across the
American Desert, Cedar and Humboldt Mountains, the Sierra Nevada, and
descends, via Sacramento, to the Pacific--its grade, even on the Rocky
Mountains, never exceeding one hundred and twelve feet to the mile.

Such was the road to be traversed in seven days, which would enable
Phileas Fogg--at least, so he hoped--to take the Atlantic steamer at
New York on the 11th for Liverpool.

The car which he occupied was a sort of long omnibus on eight wheels,
and with no compartments in the interior.  It was supplied with two
rows of seats, perpendicular to the direction of the train on either
side of an aisle which conducted to the front and rear platforms.
These platforms were found throughout the train, and the passengers
were able to pass from one end of the train to the other.  It was
supplied with saloon cars, balcony cars, restaurants, and smoking-cars;
theatre cars alone were wanting, and they will have these some day.

Book and news dealers, sellers of edibles, drinkables, and cigars, who
seemed to have plenty of customers, were continually circulating in the
aisles.

The train left Oakland station at six o'clock.  It was already night,
cold and cheerless, the heavens being overcast with clouds which seemed
to threaten snow.  The train did not proceed rapidly; counting the
stoppages, it did not run more than twenty miles an hour, which was a
sufficient speed, however, to enable it to reach Omaha within its
designated time.

There was but little conversation in the car, and soon many of the
passengers were overcome with sleep.  Passepartout found himself beside
the detective; but he did not talk to him.  After recent events, their
relations with each other had grown somewhat cold; there could no
longer be mutual sympathy or intimacy between them.  Fix's manner had
not changed; but Passepartout was very reserved, and ready to strangle
his former friend on the slightest provocation.

Snow began to fall an hour after they started, a fine snow, however,
which happily could not obstruct the train; nothing could be seen from
the windows but a vast, white sheet, against which the smoke of the
locomotive had a greyish aspect.

At eight o'clock a steward entered the car and announced that the time
for going to bed had arrived; and in a few minutes the car was
transformed into a dormitory.  The backs of the seats were thrown back,
bedsteads carefully packed were rolled out by an ingenious system,
berths were suddenly improvised, and each traveller had soon at his
disposition a comfortable bed, protected from curious eyes by thick
curtains.  The sheets were clean and the pillows soft.  It only
remained to go to bed and sleep which everybody did--while the train
sped on across the State of California.

The country between San Francisco and Sacramento is not very hilly.
The Central Pacific, taking Sacramento for its starting-point, extends
eastward to meet the road from Omaha.  The line from San Francisco to
Sacramento runs in a north-easterly direction, along the American
River, which empties into San Pablo Bay.  The one hundred and twenty
miles between these cities were accomplished in six hours, and towards
midnight, while fast asleep, the travellers passed through Sacramento;
so that they saw nothing of that important place, the seat of the State
government, with its fine quays, its broad streets, its noble hotels,
squares, and churches.

The train, on leaving Sacramento, and passing the junction, Roclin,
Auburn, and Colfax, entered the range of the Sierra Nevada.  'Cisco was
reached at seven in the morning; and an hour later the dormitory was
transformed into an ordinary car, and the travellers could observe the
picturesque beauties of the mountain region through which they were
steaming.  The railway track wound in and out among the passes, now
approaching the mountain-sides, now suspended over precipices, avoiding
abrupt angles by bold curves, plunging into narrow defiles, which
seemed to have no outlet.  The locomotive, its great funnel emitting a
weird light, with its sharp bell, and its cow-catcher extended like a
spur, mingled its shrieks and bellowings with the noise of torrents and
cascades, and twined its smoke among the branches of the gigantic pines.

There were few or no bridges or tunnels on the route.  The railway
turned around the sides of the mountains, and did not attempt to
violate nature by taking the shortest cut from one point to another.

The train entered the State of Nevada through the Carson Valley about
nine o'clock, going always northeasterly; and at midday reached Reno,
where there was a delay of twenty minutes for breakfast.

From this point the road, running along Humboldt River, passed
northward for several miles by its banks; then it turned eastward, and
kept by the river until it reached the Humboldt Range, nearly at the
extreme eastern limit of Nevada.

Having breakfasted, Mr. Fogg and his companions resumed their places in
the car, and observed the varied landscape which unfolded itself as
they passed along the vast prairies, the mountains lining the horizon,
and the creeks, with their frothy, foaming streams.  Sometimes a great
herd of buffaloes, massing together in the distance, seemed like a
moveable dam.  These innumerable multitudes of ruminating beasts often
form an insurmountable obstacle to the passage of the trains; thousands
of them have been seen passing over the track for hours together, in
compact ranks.  The locomotive is then forced to stop and wait till the
road is once more clear.

This happened, indeed, to the train in which Mr. Fogg was travelling.
About twelve o'clock a troop of ten or twelve thousand head of buffalo
encumbered the track.  The locomotive, slackening its speed, tried to
clear the way with its cow-catcher; but the mass of animals was too
great.  The buffaloes marched along with a tranquil gait, uttering now
and then deafening bellowings.  There was no use of interrupting them,
for, having taken a particular direction, nothing can moderate and
change their course; it is a torrent of living flesh which no dam could
contain.

The travellers gazed on this curious spectacle from the platforms; but
Phileas Fogg, who had the most reason of all to be in a hurry, remained
in his seat, and waited philosophically until it should please the
buffaloes to get out of the way.

Passepartout was furious at the delay they occasioned, and longed to
discharge his arsenal of revolvers upon them.

"What a country!" cried he.  "Mere cattle stop the trains, and go by in
a procession, just as if they were not impeding travel!  Parbleu!  I
should like to know if Mr. Fogg foresaw this mishap in his programme!
And here's an engineer who doesn't dare to run the locomotive into this
herd of beasts!"

The engineer did not try to overcome the obstacle, and he was wise.  He
would have crushed the first buffaloes, no doubt, with the cow-catcher;
but the locomotive, however powerful, would soon have been checked, the
train would inevitably have been thrown off the track, and would then
have been helpless.

The best course was to wait patiently, and regain the lost time by
greater speed when the obstacle was removed.  The procession of
buffaloes lasted three full hours, and it was night before the track
was clear.  The last ranks of the herd were now passing over the rails,
while the first had already disappeared below the southern horizon.

It was eight o'clock when the train passed through the defiles of the
Humboldt Range, and half-past nine when it penetrated Utah, the region
of the Great Salt Lake, the singular colony of the Mormons.




Chapter XXVII

IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT UNDERGOES, AT A SPEED OF TWENTY MILES AN HOUR, A
COURSE OF MORMON HISTORY


During the night of the 5th of December, the train ran south-easterly
for about fifty miles; then rose an equal distance in a north-easterly
direction, towards the Great Salt Lake.

Passepartout, about nine o'clock, went out upon the platform to take
the air.  The weather was cold, the heavens grey, but it was not
snowing.  The sun's disc, enlarged by the mist, seemed an enormous ring
of gold, and Passepartout was amusing himself by calculating its value
in pounds sterling, when he was diverted from this interesting study by
a strange-looking personage who made his appearance on the platform.

This personage, who had taken the train at Elko, was tall and dark,
with black moustache, black stockings, a black silk hat, a black
waistcoat, black trousers, a white cravat, and dogskin gloves.  He
might have been taken for a clergyman.  He went from one end of the
train to the other, and affixed to the door of each car a notice
written in manuscript.

Passepartout approached and read one of these notices, which stated
that Elder William Hitch, Mormon missionary, taking advantage of his
presence on train No. 48, would deliver a lecture on Mormonism in car
No. 117, from eleven to twelve o'clock; and that he invited all who
were desirous of being instructed concerning the mysteries of the
religion of the "Latter Day Saints" to attend.

"I'll go," said Passepartout to himself.  He knew nothing of Mormonism
except the custom of polygamy, which is its foundation.

The news quickly spread through the train, which contained about one
hundred passengers, thirty of whom, at most, attracted by the notice,
ensconced themselves in car No. 117.  Passepartout took one of the
front seats.  Neither Mr. Fogg nor Fix cared to attend.

At the appointed hour Elder William Hitch rose, and, in an irritated
voice, as if he had already been contradicted, said, "I tell you that
Joe Smith is a martyr, that his brother Hiram is a martyr, and that the
persecutions of the United States Government against the prophets will
also make a martyr of Brigham Young.  Who dares to say the contrary?"

No one ventured to gainsay the missionary, whose excited tone
contrasted curiously with his naturally calm visage.  No doubt his
anger arose from the hardships to which the Mormons were actually
subjected.  The government had just succeeded, with some difficulty, in
reducing these independent fanatics to its rule.  It had made itself
master of Utah, and subjected that territory to the laws of the Union,
after imprisoning Brigham Young on a charge of rebellion and polygamy.
The disciples of the prophet had since redoubled their efforts, and
resisted, by words at least, the authority of Congress.  Elder Hitch,
as is seen, was trying to make proselytes on the very railway trains.

Then, emphasising his words with his loud voice and frequent gestures,
he related the history of the Mormons from Biblical times: how that, in
Israel, a Mormon prophet of the tribe of Joseph published the annals of
the new religion, and bequeathed them to his son Mormon; how, many
centuries later, a translation of this precious book, which was written
in Egyptian, was made by Joseph Smith, junior, a Vermont farmer, who
revealed himself as a mystical prophet in 1825; and how, in short, the
celestial messenger appeared to him in an illuminated forest, and gave
him the annals of the Lord.

Several of the audience, not being much interested in the missionary's
narrative, here left the car; but Elder Hitch, continuing his lecture,
related how Smith, junior, with his father, two brothers, and a few
disciples, founded the church of the "Latter Day Saints," which,
adopted not only in America, but in England, Norway and Sweden, and
Germany, counts many artisans, as well as men engaged in the liberal
professions, among its members; how a colony was established in Ohio, a
temple erected there at a cost of two hundred thousand dollars, and a
town built at Kirkland; how Smith became an enterprising banker, and
received from a simple mummy showman a papyrus scroll written by
Abraham and several famous Egyptians.

The Elder's story became somewhat wearisome, and his audience grew
gradually less, until it was reduced to twenty passengers.  But this
did not disconcert the enthusiast, who proceeded with the story of
Joseph Smith's bankruptcy in 1837, and how his ruined creditors gave
him a coat of tar and feathers; his reappearance some years afterwards,
more honourable and honoured than ever, at Independence, Missouri, the
chief of a flourishing colony of three thousand disciples, and his
pursuit thence by outraged Gentiles, and retirement into the Far West.

Ten hearers only were now left, among them honest Passepartout, who was
listening with all his ears.  Thus he learned that, after long
persecutions, Smith reappeared in Illinois, and in 1839 founded a
community at Nauvoo, on the Mississippi, numbering twenty-five thousand
souls, of which he became mayor, chief justice, and general-in-chief;
that he announced himself, in 1843, as a candidate for the Presidency
of the United States; and that finally, being drawn into ambuscade at
Carthage, he was thrown into prison, and assassinated by a band of men
disguised in masks.

Passepartout was now the only person left in the car, and the Elder,
looking him full in the face, reminded him that, two years after the
assassination of Joseph Smith, the inspired prophet, Brigham Young, his
successor, left Nauvoo for the banks of the Great Salt Lake, where, in
the midst of that fertile region, directly on the route of the
emigrants who crossed Utah on their way to California, the new colony,
thanks to the polygamy practised by the Mormons, had flourished beyond
expectations.

"And this," added Elder William Hitch, "this is why the jealousy of
Congress has been aroused against us!  Why have the soldiers of the
Union invaded the soil of Utah?  Why has Brigham Young, our chief, been
imprisoned, in contempt of all justice?  Shall we yield to force?
Never!  Driven from Vermont, driven from Illinois, driven from Ohio,
driven from Missouri, driven from Utah, we shall yet find some
independent territory on which to plant our tents.  And you, my
brother," continued the Elder, fixing his angry eyes upon his single
auditor, "will you not plant yours there, too, under the shadow of our
flag?"

"No!" replied Passepartout courageously, in his turn retiring from the
car, and leaving the Elder to preach to vacancy.

During the lecture the train had been making good progress, and towards
half-past twelve it reached the northwest border of the Great Salt
Lake.  Thence the passengers could observe the vast extent of this
interior sea, which is also called the Dead Sea, and into which flows
an American Jordan.  It is a picturesque expanse, framed in lofty crags
in large strata, encrusted with white salt--a superb sheet of water,
which was formerly of larger extent than now, its shores having
encroached with the lapse of time, and thus at once reduced its breadth
and increased its depth.

The Salt Lake, seventy miles long and thirty-five wide, is situated
three miles eight hundred feet above the sea.  Quite different from
Lake Asphaltite, whose depression is twelve hundred feet below the sea,
it contains considerable salt, and one quarter of the weight of its
water is solid matter, its specific weight being 1,170, and, after
being distilled, 1,000.  Fishes are, of course, unable to live in it,
and those which descend through the Jordan, the Weber, and other
streams soon perish.

The country around the lake was well cultivated, for the Mormons are
mostly farmers; while ranches and pens for domesticated animals, fields
of wheat, corn, and other cereals, luxuriant prairies, hedges of wild
rose, clumps of acacias and milk-wort, would have been seen six months
later.  Now the ground was covered with a thin powdering of snow.

The train reached Ogden at two o'clock, where it rested for six hours,
Mr. Fogg and his party had time to pay a visit to Salt Lake City,
connected with Ogden by a branch road; and they spent two hours in this
strikingly American town, built on the pattern of other cities of the
Union, like a checker-board, "with the sombre sadness of right-angles,"
as Victor Hugo expresses it.  The founder of the City of the Saints
could not escape from the taste for symmetry which distinguishes the
Anglo-Saxons.  In this strange country, where the people are certainly
not up to the level of their institutions, everything is done
"squarely"--cities, houses, and follies.

The travellers, then, were promenading, at three o'clock, about the
streets of the town built between the banks of the Jordan and the spurs
of the Wahsatch Range.  They saw few or no churches, but the prophet's
mansion, the court-house, and the arsenal, blue-brick houses with
verandas and porches, surrounded by gardens bordered with acacias,
palms, and locusts.  A clay and pebble wall, built in 1853, surrounded
the town; and in the principal street were the market and several
hotels adorned with pavilions.  The place did not seem thickly
populated.  The streets were almost deserted, except in the vicinity of
the temple, which they only reached after having traversed several
quarters surrounded by palisades.  There were many women, which was
easily accounted for by the "peculiar institution" of the Mormons; but
it must not be supposed that all the Mormons are polygamists.  They are
free to marry or not, as they please; but it is worth noting that it is
mainly the female citizens of Utah who are anxious to marry, as,
according to the Mormon religion, maiden ladies are not admitted to the
possession of its highest joys.  These poor creatures seemed to be
neither well off nor happy.  Some--the more well-to-do, no doubt--wore
short, open, black silk dresses, under a hood or modest shawl; others
were habited in Indian fashion.

Passepartout could not behold without a certain fright these women,
charged, in groups, with conferring happiness on a single Mormon.  His
common sense pitied, above all, the husband.  It seemed to him a
terrible thing to have to guide so many wives at once across the
vicissitudes of life, and to conduct them, as it were, in a body to the
Mormon paradise with the prospect of seeing them in the company of the
glorious Smith, who doubtless was the chief ornament of that delightful
place, to all eternity.  He felt decidedly repelled from such a
vocation, and he imagined--perhaps he was mistaken--that the fair ones
of Salt Lake City cast rather alarming glances on his person.  Happily,
his stay there was but brief.  At four the party found themselves again
at the station, took their places in the train, and the whistle sounded
for starting.  Just at the moment, however, that the locomotive wheels
began to move, cries of "Stop! stop!" were heard.

Trains, like time and tide, stop for no one.  The gentleman who uttered
the cries was evidently a belated Mormon.  He was breathless with
running.  Happily for him, the station had neither gates nor barriers.
He rushed along the track, jumped on the rear platform of the train,
and fell, exhausted, into one of the seats.

Passepartout, who had been anxiously watching this amateur gymnast,
approached him with lively interest, and learned that he had taken
flight after an unpleasant domestic scene.

When the Mormon had recovered his breath, Passepartout ventured to ask
him politely how many wives he had; for, from the manner in which he
had decamped, it might be thought that he had twenty at least.

"One, sir," replied the Mormon, raising his arms heavenward--"one, and
that was enough!"




Chapter XXVIII

IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT DOES NOT SUCCEED IN MAKING ANYBODY LISTEN TO
REASON


The train, on leaving Great Salt Lake at Ogden, passed northward for an
hour as far as Weber River, having completed nearly nine hundred miles
from San Francisco.  From this point it took an easterly direction
towards the jagged Wahsatch Mountains.  It was in the section included
between this range and the Rocky Mountains that the American engineers
found the most formidable difficulties in laying the road, and that the
government granted a subsidy of forty-eight thousand dollars per mile,
instead of sixteen thousand allowed for the work done on the plains.
But the engineers, instead of violating nature, avoided its
difficulties by winding around, instead of penetrating the rocks.  One
tunnel only, fourteen thousand feet in length, was pierced in order to
arrive at the great basin.

The track up to this time had reached its highest elevation at the
Great Salt Lake.  From this point it described a long curve, descending
towards Bitter Creek Valley, to rise again to the dividing ridge of the
waters between the Atlantic and the Pacific.  There were many creeks in
this mountainous region, and it was necessary to cross Muddy Creek,
Green Creek, and others, upon culverts.

Passepartout grew more and more impatient as they went on, while Fix
longed to get out of this difficult region, and was more anxious than
Phileas Fogg himself to be beyond the danger of delays and accidents,
and set foot on English soil.

At ten o'clock at night the train stopped at Fort Bridger station, and
twenty minutes later entered Wyoming Territory, following the valley of
Bitter Creek throughout.  The next day, 7th December, they stopped for
a quarter of an hour at Green River station.  Snow had fallen
abundantly during the night, but, being mixed with rain, it had half
melted, and did not interrupt their progress.  The bad weather,
however, annoyed Passepartout; for the accumulation of snow, by
blocking the wheels of the cars, would certainly have been fatal to Mr.
Fogg's tour.

"What an idea!" he said to himself.  "Why did my master make this
journey in winter?  Couldn't he have waited for the good season to
increase his chances?"

While the worthy Frenchman was absorbed in the state of the sky and the
depression of the temperature, Aouda was experiencing fears from a
totally different cause.

Several passengers had got off at Green River, and were walking up and
down the platforms; and among these Aouda recognised Colonel Stamp
Proctor, the same who had so grossly insulted Phileas Fogg at the San
Francisco meeting.  Not wishing to be recognised, the young woman drew
back from the window, feeling much alarm at her discovery.  She was
attached to the man who, however coldly, gave her daily evidences of
the most absolute devotion.  She did not comprehend, perhaps, the depth
of the sentiment with which her protector inspired her, which she
called gratitude, but which, though she was unconscious of it, was
really more than that.  Her heart sank within her when she recognised
the man whom Mr. Fogg desired, sooner or later, to call to account for
his conduct.  Chance alone, it was clear, had brought Colonel Proctor
on this train; but there he was, and it was necessary, at all hazards,
that Phileas Fogg should not perceive his adversary.

Aouda seized a moment when Mr. Fogg was asleep to tell Fix and
Passepartout whom she had seen.

"That Proctor on this train!" cried Fix.  "Well, reassure yourself,
madam; before he settles with Mr. Fogg; he has got to deal with me!  It
seems to me that I was the more insulted of the two."

"And, besides," added Passepartout, "I'll take charge of him, colonel
as he is."

"Mr. Fix," resumed Aouda, "Mr. Fogg will allow no one to avenge him.
He said that he would come back to America to find this man.  Should he
perceive Colonel Proctor, we could not prevent a collision which might
have terrible results.  He must not see him."

"You are right, madam," replied Fix; "a meeting between them might ruin
all.  Whether he were victorious or beaten, Mr. Fogg would be delayed,
and--"

"And," added Passepartout, "that would play the game of the gentlemen
of the Reform Club.  In four days we shall be in New York.  Well, if my
master does not leave this car during those four days, we may hope that
chance will not bring him face to face with this confounded American.
We must, if possible, prevent his stirring out of it."

The conversation dropped.  Mr. Fogg had just woke up, and was looking
out of the window.  Soon after Passepartout, without being heard by his
master or Aouda, whispered to the detective, "Would you really fight
for him?"

"I would do anything," replied Fix, in a tone which betrayed determined
will, "to get him back living to Europe!"

Passepartout felt something like a shudder shoot through his frame, but
his confidence in his master remained unbroken.

Was there any means of detaining Mr. Fogg in the car, to avoid a
meeting between him and the colonel?  It ought not to be a difficult
task, since that gentleman was naturally sedentary and little curious.
The detective, at least, seemed to have found a way; for, after a few
moments, he said to Mr. Fogg, "These are long and slow hours, sir, that
we are passing on the railway."

"Yes," replied Mr. Fogg; "but they pass."

"You were in the habit of playing whist," resumed Fix, "on the
steamers."

"Yes; but it would be difficult to do so here.  I have neither cards
nor partners."

"Oh, but we can easily buy some cards, for they are sold on all the
American trains.  And as for partners, if madam plays--"

"Certainly, sir," Aouda quickly replied; "I understand whist.  It is
part of an English education."

"I myself have some pretensions to playing a good game.  Well, here are
three of us, and a dummy--"

"As you please, sir," replied Phileas Fogg, heartily glad to resume his
favourite pastime even on the railway.

Passepartout was dispatched in search of the steward, and soon returned
with two packs of cards, some pins, counters, and a shelf covered with
cloth.

The game commenced.  Aouda understood whist sufficiently well, and even
received some compliments on her playing from Mr. Fogg.  As for the
detective, he was simply an adept, and worthy of being matched against
his present opponent.

"Now," thought Passepartout, "we've got him.  He won't budge."

At eleven in the morning the train had reached the dividing ridge of
the waters at Bridger Pass, seven thousand five hundred and twenty-four
feet above the level of the sea, one of the highest points attained by
the track in crossing the Rocky Mountains.  After going about two
hundred miles, the travellers at last found themselves on one of those
vast plains which extend to the Atlantic, and which nature has made so
propitious for laying the iron road.

On the declivity of the Atlantic basin the first streams, branches of
the North Platte River, already appeared.  The whole northern and
eastern horizon was bounded by the immense semi-circular curtain which
is formed by the southern portion of the Rocky Mountains, the highest
being Laramie Peak.  Between this and the railway extended vast plains,
plentifully irrigated.  On the right rose the lower spurs of the
mountainous mass which extends southward to the sources of the Arkansas
River, one of the great tributaries of the Missouri.

At half-past twelve the travellers caught sight for an instant of Fort
Halleck, which commands that section; and in a few more hours the Rocky
Mountains were crossed.  There was reason to hope, then, that no
accident would mark the journey through this difficult country.  The
snow had ceased falling, and the air became crisp and cold.  Large
birds, frightened by the locomotive, rose and flew off in the distance.
No wild beast appeared on the plain.  It was a desert in its vast
nakedness.

After a comfortable breakfast, served in the car, Mr. Fogg and his
partners had just resumed whist, when a violent whistling was heard,
and the train stopped.  Passepartout put his head out of the door, but
saw nothing to cause the delay; no station was in view.

Aouda and Fix feared that Mr. Fogg might take it into his head to get
out; but that gentleman contented himself with saying to his servant,
"See what is the matter."

Passepartout rushed out of the car.  Thirty or forty passengers had
already descended, amongst them Colonel Stamp Proctor.

The train had stopped before a red signal which blocked the way.  The
engineer and conductor were talking excitedly with a signal-man, whom
the station-master at Medicine Bow, the next stopping place, had sent
on before.  The passengers drew around and took part in the discussion,
in which Colonel Proctor, with his insolent manner, was conspicuous.

Passepartout, joining the group, heard the signal-man say, "No! you
can't pass.  The bridge at Medicine Bow is shaky, and would not bear
the weight of the train."

This was a suspension-bridge thrown over some rapids, about a mile from
the place where they now were.  According to the signal-man, it was in
a ruinous condition, several of the iron wires being broken; and it was
impossible to risk the passage.  He did not in any way exaggerate the
condition of the bridge.  It may be taken for granted that, rash as the
Americans usually are, when they are prudent there is good reason for
it.

Passepartout, not daring to apprise his master of what he heard,
listened with set teeth, immovable as a statue.

"Hum!" cried Colonel Proctor; "but we are not going to stay here, I
imagine, and take root in the snow?"

"Colonel," replied the conductor, "we have telegraphed to Omaha for a
train, but it is not likely that it will reach Medicine Bow in less
than six hours."

"Six hours!" cried Passepartout.

"Certainly," returned the conductor, "besides, it will take us as long
as that to reach Medicine Bow on foot."

"But it is only a mile from here," said one of the passengers.

"Yes, but it's on the other side of the river."

"And can't we cross that in a boat?" asked the colonel.

"That's impossible.  The creek is swelled by the rains.  It is a rapid,
and we shall have to make a circuit of ten miles to the north to find a
ford."

The colonel launched a volley of oaths, denouncing the railway company
and the conductor; and Passepartout, who was furious, was not
disinclined to make common cause with him.  Here was an obstacle,
indeed, which all his master's banknotes could not remove.

There was a general disappointment among the passengers, who, without
reckoning the delay, saw themselves compelled to trudge fifteen miles
over a plain covered with snow.  They grumbled and protested, and would
certainly have thus attracted Phileas Fogg's attention if he had not
been completely absorbed in his game.

Passepartout found that he could not avoid telling his master what had
occurred, and, with hanging head, he was turning towards the car, when
the engineer, a true Yankee, named Forster called out, "Gentlemen,
perhaps there is a way, after all, to get over."

"On the bridge?" asked a passenger.

"On the bridge."

"With our train?"

"With our train."

Passepartout stopped short, and eagerly listened to the engineer.

"But the bridge is unsafe," urged the conductor.

"No matter," replied Forster; "I think that by putting on the very
highest speed we might have a chance of getting over."

"The devil!" muttered Passepartout.

But a number of the passengers were at once attracted by the engineer's
proposal, and Colonel Proctor was especially delighted, and found the
plan a very feasible one.  He told stories about engineers leaping
their trains over rivers without bridges, by putting on full steam; and
many of those present avowed themselves of the engineer's mind.

"We have fifty chances out of a hundred of getting over," said one.

"Eighty! ninety!"

Passepartout was astounded, and, though ready to attempt anything to
get over Medicine Creek, thought the experiment proposed a little too
American.  "Besides," thought he, "there's a still more simple way, and
it does not even occur to any of these people!  Sir," said he aloud to
one of the passengers, "the engineer's plan seems to me a little
dangerous, but--"

"Eighty chances!" replied the passenger, turning his back on him.

"I know it," said Passepartout, turning to another passenger, "but a
simple idea--"

"Ideas are no use," returned the American, shrugging his shoulders, "as
the engineer assures us that we can pass."

"Doubtless," urged Passepartout, "we can pass, but perhaps it would be
more prudent--"

"What!  Prudent!" cried Colonel Proctor, whom this word seemed to
excite prodigiously.  "At full speed, don't you see, at full speed!"

"I know--I see," repeated Passepartout; "but it would be, if not more
prudent, since that word displeases you, at least more natural--"

"Who!  What!  What's the matter with this fellow?" cried several.

The poor fellow did not know to whom to address himself.

"Are you afraid?" asked Colonel Proctor.

"I afraid?  Very well; I will show these people that a Frenchman can be
as American as they!"

"All aboard!" cried the conductor.

"Yes, all aboard!" repeated Passepartout, and immediately.  "But they
can't prevent me from thinking that it would be more natural for us to
cross the bridge on foot, and let the train come after!"

But no one heard this sage reflection, nor would anyone have
acknowledged its justice.  The passengers resumed their places in the
cars.  Passepartout took his seat without telling what had passed.  The
whist-players were quite absorbed in their game.

The locomotive whistled vigorously; the engineer, reversing the steam,
backed the train for nearly a mile--retiring, like a jumper, in order
to take a longer leap.  Then, with another whistle, he began to move
forward; the train increased its speed, and soon its rapidity became
frightful; a prolonged screech issued from the locomotive; the piston
worked up and down twenty strokes to the second.  They perceived that
the whole train, rushing on at the rate of a hundred miles an hour,
hardly bore upon the rails at all.

And they passed over!  It was like a flash.  No one saw the bridge.
The train leaped, so to speak, from one bank to the other, and the
engineer could not stop it until it had gone five miles beyond the
station.  But scarcely had the train passed the river, when the bridge,
completely ruined, fell with a crash into the rapids of Medicine Bow.




Chapter XXIX

IN WHICH CERTAIN INCIDENTS ARE NARRATED WHICH ARE ONLY TO BE MET WITH
ON AMERICAN RAILROADS


The train pursued its course, that evening, without interruption,
passing Fort Saunders, crossing Cheyne Pass, and reaching Evans Pass.
The road here attained the highest elevation of the journey, eight
thousand and ninety-two feet above the level of the sea.  The
travellers had now only to descend to the Atlantic by limitless plains,
levelled by nature.  A branch of the "grand trunk" led off southward to
Denver, the capital of Colorado.  The country round about is rich in
gold and silver, and more than fifty thousand inhabitants are already
settled there.

Thirteen hundred and eighty-two miles had been passed over from San
Francisco, in three days and three nights; four days and nights more
would probably bring them to New York.  Phileas Fogg was not as yet
behind-hand.

During the night Camp Walbach was passed on the left; Lodge Pole Creek
ran parallel with the road, marking the boundary between the
territories of Wyoming and Colorado.  They entered Nebraska at eleven,
passed near Sedgwick, and touched at Julesburg, on the southern branch
of the Platte River.

It was here that the Union Pacific Railroad was inaugurated on the 23rd
of October, 1867, by the chief engineer, General Dodge.  Two powerful
locomotives, carrying nine cars of invited guests, amongst whom was
Thomas C. Durant, vice-president of the road, stopped at this point;
cheers were given, the Sioux and Pawnees performed an imitation Indian
battle, fireworks were let off, and the first number of the Railway
Pioneer was printed by a press brought on the train.  Thus was
celebrated the inauguration of this great railroad, a mighty instrument
of progress and civilisation, thrown across the desert, and destined to
link together cities and towns which do not yet exist.  The whistle of
the locomotive, more powerful than Amphion's lyre, was about to bid
them rise from American soil.

Fort McPherson was left behind at eight in the morning, and three
hundred and fifty-seven miles had yet to be traversed before reaching
Omaha.  The road followed the capricious windings of the southern
branch of the Platte River, on its left bank.  At nine the train
stopped at the important town of North Platte, built between the two
arms of the river, which rejoin each other around it and form a single
artery, a large tributary, whose waters empty into the Missouri a
little above Omaha.

The one hundred and first meridian was passed.

Mr. Fogg and his partners had resumed their game; no one--not even the
dummy--complained of the length of the trip.  Fix had begun by winning
several guineas, which he seemed likely to lose; but he showed himself
a not less eager whist-player than Mr. Fogg.  During the morning,
chance distinctly favoured that gentleman.  Trumps and honours were
showered upon his hands.

Once, having resolved on a bold stroke, he was on the point of playing
a spade, when a voice behind him said, "I should play a diamond."

Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Fix raised their heads, and beheld Colonel Proctor.

Stamp Proctor and Phileas Fogg recognised each other at once.

"Ah! it's you, is it, Englishman?" cried the colonel; "it's you who are
going to play a spade!"

"And who plays it," replied Phileas Fogg coolly, throwing down the ten
of spades.

"Well, it pleases me to have it diamonds," replied Colonel Proctor, in
an insolent tone.

He made a movement as if to seize the card which had just been played,
adding, "You don't understand anything about whist."

"Perhaps I do, as well as another," said Phileas Fogg, rising.

"You have only to try, son of John Bull," replied the colonel.

Aouda turned pale, and her blood ran cold.  She seized Mr. Fogg's arm
and gently pulled him back.  Passepartout was ready to pounce upon the
American, who was staring insolently at his opponent.  But Fix got up,
and, going to Colonel Proctor said, "You forget that it is I with whom
you have to deal, sir; for it was I whom you not only insulted, but
struck!"

"Mr. Fix," said Mr. Fogg, "pardon me, but this affair is mine, and mine
only.  The colonel has again insulted me, by insisting that I should
not play a spade, and he shall give me satisfaction for it."

"When and where you will," replied the American, "and with whatever
weapon you choose."

Aouda in vain attempted to retain Mr. Fogg; as vainly did the detective
endeavour to make the quarrel his.  Passepartout wished to throw the
colonel out of the window, but a sign from his master checked him.
Phileas Fogg left the car, and the American followed him upon the
platform.  "Sir," said Mr. Fogg to his adversary, "I am in a great
hurry to get back to Europe, and any delay whatever will be greatly to
my disadvantage."

"Well, what's that to me?" replied Colonel Proctor.

"Sir," said Mr. Fogg, very politely, "after our meeting at San
Francisco, I determined to return to America and find you as soon as I
had completed the business which called me to England."

"Really!"

"Will you appoint a meeting for six months hence?"

"Why not ten years hence?"

"I say six months," returned Phileas Fogg; "and I shall be at the place
of meeting promptly."

"All this is an evasion," cried Stamp Proctor.  "Now or never!"

"Very good.  You are going to New York?"

"No."

"To Chicago?"

"No."

"To Omaha?"

"What difference is it to you?  Do you know Plum Creek?"

"No," replied Mr. Fogg.

"It's the next station.  The train will be there in an hour, and will
stop there ten minutes.  In ten minutes several revolver-shots could be
exchanged."

"Very well," said Mr. Fogg.  "I will stop at Plum Creek."

"And I guess you'll stay there too," added the American insolently.

"Who knows?" replied Mr. Fogg, returning to the car as coolly as usual.
He began to reassure Aouda, telling her that blusterers were never to
be feared, and begged Fix to be his second at the approaching duel, a
request which the detective could not refuse.  Mr. Fogg resumed the
interrupted game with perfect calmness.

At eleven o'clock the locomotive's whistle announced that they were
approaching Plum Creek station.  Mr. Fogg rose, and, followed by Fix,
went out upon the platform.  Passepartout accompanied him, carrying a
pair of revolvers.  Aouda remained in the car, as pale as death.

The door of the next car opened, and Colonel Proctor appeared on the
platform, attended by a Yankee of his own stamp as his second.  But
just as the combatants were about to step from the train, the conductor
hurried up, and shouted, "You can't get off, gentlemen!"

"Why not?" asked the colonel.

"We are twenty minutes late, and we shall not stop."

"But I am going to fight a duel with this gentleman."

"I am sorry," said the conductor; "but we shall be off at once.
There's the bell ringing now."

The train started.

"I'm really very sorry, gentlemen," said the conductor.  "Under any
other circumstances I should have been happy to oblige you.  But, after
all, as you have not had time to fight here, why not fight as we go
along?"

"That wouldn't be convenient, perhaps, for this gentleman," said the
colonel, in a jeering tone.

"It would be perfectly so," replied Phileas Fogg.

"Well, we are really in America," thought Passepartout, "and the
conductor is a gentleman of the first order!"

So muttering, he followed his master.

The two combatants, their seconds, and the conductor passed through the
cars to the rear of the train.  The last car was only occupied by a
dozen passengers, whom the conductor politely asked if they would not
be so kind as to leave it vacant for a few moments, as two gentlemen
had an affair of honour to settle.  The passengers granted the request
with alacrity, and straightway disappeared on the platform.

The car, which was some fifty feet long, was very convenient for their
purpose.  The adversaries might march on each other in the aisle, and
fire at their ease.  Never was duel more easily arranged.  Mr. Fogg and
Colonel Proctor, each provided with two six-barrelled revolvers,
entered the car.  The seconds, remaining outside, shut them in.  They
were to begin firing at the first whistle of the locomotive.  After an
interval of two minutes, what remained of the two gentlemen would be
taken from the car.

Nothing could be more simple.  Indeed, it was all so simple that Fix
and Passepartout felt their hearts beating as if they would crack.
They were listening for the whistle agreed upon, when suddenly savage
cries resounded in the air, accompanied by reports which certainly did
not issue from the car where the duellists were.  The reports continued
in front and the whole length of the train.  Cries of terror proceeded
from the interior of the cars.

Colonel Proctor and Mr. Fogg, revolvers in hand, hastily quitted their
prison, and rushed forward where the noise was most clamorous.  They
then perceived that the train was attacked by a band of Sioux.

This was not the first attempt of these daring Indians, for more than
once they had waylaid trains on the road.  A hundred of them had,
according to their habit, jumped upon the steps without stopping the
train, with the ease of a clown mounting a horse at full gallop.

The Sioux were armed with guns, from which came the reports, to which
the passengers, who were almost all armed, responded by revolver-shots.

The Indians had first mounted the engine, and half stunned the engineer
and stoker with blows from their muskets.  A Sioux chief, wishing to
stop the train, but not knowing how to work the regulator, had opened
wide instead of closing the steam-valve, and the locomotive was
plunging forward with terrific velocity.

The Sioux had at the same time invaded the cars, skipping like enraged
monkeys over the roofs, thrusting open the doors, and fighting hand to
hand with the passengers.  Penetrating the baggage-car, they pillaged
it, throwing the trunks out of the train.  The cries and shots were
constant.  The travellers defended themselves bravely; some of the cars
were barricaded, and sustained a siege, like moving forts, carried
along at a speed of a hundred miles an hour.

Aouda behaved courageously from the first.  She defended herself like a
true heroine with a revolver, which she shot through the broken windows
whenever a savage made his appearance.  Twenty Sioux had fallen
mortally wounded to the ground, and the wheels crushed those who fell
upon the rails as if they had been worms.  Several passengers, shot or
stunned, lay on the seats.

It was necessary to put an end to the struggle, which had lasted for
ten minutes, and which would result in the triumph of the Sioux if the
train was not stopped.  Fort Kearney station, where there was a
garrison, was only two miles distant; but, that once passed, the Sioux
would be masters of the train between Fort Kearney and the station
beyond.

The conductor was fighting beside Mr. Fogg, when he was shot and fell.
At the same moment he cried, "Unless the train is stopped in five
minutes, we are lost!"

"It shall be stopped," said Phileas Fogg, preparing to rush from the
car.

"Stay, monsieur," cried Passepartout; "I will go."

Mr. Fogg had not time to stop the brave fellow, who, opening a door
unperceived by the Indians, succeeded in slipping under the car; and
while the struggle continued and the balls whizzed across each other
over his head, he made use of his old acrobatic experience, and with
amazing agility worked his way under the cars, holding on to the
chains, aiding himself by the brakes and edges of the sashes, creeping
from one car to another with marvellous skill, and thus gaining the
forward end of the train.

There, suspended by one hand between the baggage-car and the tender,
with the other he loosened the safety chains; but, owing to the
traction, he would never have succeeded in unscrewing the yoking-bar,
had not a violent concussion jolted this bar out.  The train, now
detached from the engine, remained a little behind, whilst the
locomotive rushed forward with increased speed.

Carried on by the force already acquired, the train still moved for
several minutes; but the brakes were worked and at last they stopped,
less than a hundred feet from Kearney station.

The soldiers of the fort, attracted by the shots, hurried up; the Sioux
had not expected them, and decamped in a body before the train entirely
stopped.

But when the passengers counted each other on the station platform
several were found missing; among others the courageous Frenchman,
whose devotion had just saved them.




Chapter XXX

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SIMPLY DOES HIS DUTY


Three passengers including Passepartout had disappeared.  Had they been
killed in the struggle?  Were they taken prisoners by the Sioux?  It
was impossible to tell.

There were many wounded, but none mortally.  Colonel Proctor was one of
the most seriously hurt; he had fought bravely, and a ball had entered
his groin.  He was carried into the station with the other wounded
passengers, to receive such attention as could be of avail.

Aouda was safe; and Phileas Fogg, who had been in the thickest of the
fight, had not received a scratch.  Fix was slightly wounded in the
arm.  But Passepartout was not to be found, and tears coursed down
Aouda's cheeks.

All the passengers had got out of the train, the wheels of which were
stained with blood.  From the tyres and spokes hung ragged pieces of
flesh.  As far as the eye could reach on the white plain behind, red
trails were visible.  The last Sioux were disappearing in the south,
along the banks of Republican River.

Mr. Fogg, with folded arms, remained motionless.  He had a serious
decision to make.  Aouda, standing near him, looked at him without
speaking, and he understood her look.  If his servant was a prisoner,
ought he not to risk everything to rescue him from the Indians?  "I
will find him, living or dead," said he quietly to Aouda.

"Ah, Mr.--Mr. Fogg!" cried she, clasping his hands and covering them
with tears.

"Living," added Mr. Fogg, "if we do not lose a moment."

Phileas Fogg, by this resolution, inevitably sacrificed himself; he
pronounced his own doom.  The delay of a single day would make him lose
the steamer at New York, and his bet would be certainly lost.  But as
he thought, "It is my duty," he did not hesitate.

The commanding officer of Fort Kearney was there.  A hundred of his
soldiers had placed themselves in a position to defend the station,
should the Sioux attack it.

"Sir," said Mr. Fogg to the captain, "three passengers have
disappeared."

"Dead?" asked the captain.

"Dead or prisoners; that is the uncertainty which must be solved.  Do
you propose to pursue the Sioux?"

"That's a serious thing to do, sir," returned the captain.  "These
Indians may retreat beyond the Arkansas, and I cannot leave the fort
unprotected."

"The lives of three men are in question, sir," said Phileas Fogg.

"Doubtless; but can I risk the lives of fifty men to save three?"

"I don't know whether you can, sir; but you ought to do so."

"Nobody here," returned the other, "has a right to teach me my duty."

"Very well," said Mr. Fogg, coldly.  "I will go alone."

"You, sir!" cried Fix, coming up; "you go alone in pursuit of the
Indians?"

"Would you have me leave this poor fellow to perish--him to whom every
one present owes his life?  I shall go."

"No, sir, you shall not go alone," cried the captain, touched in spite
of himself.  "No! you are a brave man.  Thirty volunteers!" he added,
turning to the soldiers.

The whole company started forward at once.  The captain had only to
pick his men.  Thirty were chosen, and an old sergeant placed at their
head.

"Thanks, captain," said Mr. Fogg.

"Will you let me go with you?" asked Fix.

"Do as you please, sir.  But if you wish to do me a favour, you will
remain with Aouda.  In case anything should happen to me--"

A sudden pallor overspread the detective's face.  Separate himself from
the man whom he had so persistently followed step by step!  Leave him
to wander about in this desert!  Fix gazed attentively at Mr. Fogg,
and, despite his suspicions and of the struggle which was going on
within him, he lowered his eyes before that calm and frank look.

"I will stay," said he.

A few moments after, Mr. Fogg pressed the young woman's hand, and,
having confided to her his precious carpet-bag, went off with the
sergeant and his little squad.  But, before going, he had said to the
soldiers, "My friends, I will divide five thousand dollars among you,
if we save the prisoners."

It was then a little past noon.

Aouda retired to a waiting-room, and there she waited alone, thinking
of the simple and noble generosity, the tranquil courage of Phileas
Fogg.  He had sacrificed his fortune, and was now risking his life, all
without hesitation, from duty, in silence.

Fix did not have the same thoughts, and could scarcely conceal his
agitation.  He walked feverishly up and down the platform, but soon
resumed his outward composure.  He now saw the folly of which he had
been guilty in letting Fogg go alone.  What!  This man, whom he had
just followed around the world, was permitted now to separate himself
from him!  He began to accuse and abuse himself, and, as if he were
director of police, administered to himself a sound lecture for his
greenness.

"I have been an idiot!" he thought, "and this man will see it.  He has
gone, and won't come back!  But how is it that I, Fix, who have in my
pocket a warrant for his arrest, have been so fascinated by him?
Decidedly, I am nothing but an ass!"

So reasoned the detective, while the hours crept by all too slowly.  He
did not know what to do.  Sometimes he was tempted to tell Aouda all;
but he could not doubt how the young woman would receive his
confidences.  What course should he take?  He thought of pursuing Fogg
across the vast white plains; it did not seem impossible that he might
overtake him.  Footsteps were easily printed on the snow!  But soon,
under a new sheet, every imprint would be effaced.

Fix became discouraged.  He felt a sort of insurmountable longing to
abandon the game altogether.  He could now leave Fort Kearney station,
and pursue his journey homeward in peace.

Towards two o'clock in the afternoon, while it was snowing hard, long
whistles were heard approaching from the east.  A great shadow,
preceded by a wild light, slowly advanced, appearing still larger
through the mist, which gave it a fantastic aspect.  No train was
expected from the east, neither had there been time for the succour
asked for by telegraph to arrive; the train from Omaha to San Francisco
was not due till the next day.  The mystery was soon explained.

The locomotive, which was slowly approaching with deafening whistles,
was that which, having been detached from the train, had continued its
route with such terrific rapidity, carrying off the unconscious
engineer and stoker.  It had run several miles, when, the fire becoming
low for want of fuel, the steam had slackened; and it had finally
stopped an hour after, some twenty miles beyond Fort Kearney.  Neither
the engineer nor the stoker was dead, and, after remaining for some
time in their swoon, had come to themselves.  The train had then
stopped.  The engineer, when he found himself in the desert, and the
locomotive without cars, understood what had happened.  He could not
imagine how the locomotive had become separated from the train; but he
did not doubt that the train left behind was in distress.

He did not hesitate what to do.  It would be prudent to continue on to
Omaha, for it would be dangerous to return to the train, which the
Indians might still be engaged in pillaging.  Nevertheless, he began to
rebuild the fire in the furnace; the pressure again mounted, and the
locomotive returned, running backwards to Fort Kearney.  This it was
which was whistling in the mist.

The travellers were glad to see the locomotive resume its place at the
head of the train.  They could now continue the journey so terribly
interrupted.

Aouda, on seeing the locomotive come up, hurried out of the station,
and asked the conductor, "Are you going to start?"

"At once, madam."

"But the prisoners, our unfortunate fellow-travellers--"

"I cannot interrupt the trip," replied the conductor.  "We are already
three hours behind time."

"And when will another train pass here from San Francisco?"

"To-morrow evening, madam."

"To-morrow evening!  But then it will be too late!  We must wait--"

"It is impossible," responded the conductor.  "If you wish to go,
please get in."

"I will not go," said Aouda.

Fix had heard this conversation.  A little while before, when there was
no prospect of proceeding on the journey, he had made up his mind to
leave Fort Kearney; but now that the train was there, ready to start,
and he had only to take his seat in the car, an irresistible influence
held him back.  The station platform burned his feet, and he could not
stir.  The conflict in his mind again began; anger and failure stifled
him.  He wished to struggle on to the end.

Meanwhile the passengers and some of the wounded, among them Colonel
Proctor, whose injuries were serious, had taken their places in the
train.  The buzzing of the over-heated boiler was heard, and the steam
was escaping from the valves.  The engineer whistled, the train
started, and soon disappeared, mingling its white smoke with the eddies
of the densely falling snow.

The detective had remained behind.

Several hours passed.  The weather was dismal, and it was very cold.
Fix sat motionless on a bench in the station; he might have been
thought asleep.  Aouda, despite the storm, kept coming out of the
waiting-room, going to the end of the platform, and peering through the
tempest of snow, as if to pierce the mist which narrowed the horizon
around her, and to hear, if possible, some welcome sound.  She heard
and saw nothing.  Then she would return, chilled through, to issue out
again after the lapse of a few moments, but always in vain.

Evening came, and the little band had not returned.  Where could they
be?  Had they found the Indians, and were they having a conflict with
them, or were they still wandering amid the mist?  The commander of the
fort was anxious, though he tried to conceal his apprehensions.  As
night approached, the snow fell less plentifully, but it became
intensely cold.  Absolute silence rested on the plains.  Neither flight
of bird nor passing of beast troubled the perfect calm.

Throughout the night Aouda, full of sad forebodings, her heart stifled
with anguish, wandered about on the verge of the plains.  Her
imagination carried her far off, and showed her innumerable dangers.
What she suffered through the long hours it would be impossible to
describe.

Fix remained stationary in the same place, but did not sleep.  Once a
man approached and spoke to him, and the detective merely replied by
shaking his head.

Thus the night passed.  At dawn, the half-extinguished disc of the sun
rose above a misty horizon; but it was now possible to recognise
objects two miles off.  Phileas Fogg and the squad had gone southward;
in the south all was still vacancy.  It was then seven o'clock.

The captain, who was really alarmed, did not know what course to take.

Should he send another detachment to the rescue of the first?  Should
he sacrifice more men, with so few chances of saving those already
sacrificed?  His hesitation did not last long, however.  Calling one of
his lieutenants, he was on the point of ordering a reconnaissance, when
gunshots were heard.  Was it a signal?  The soldiers rushed out of the
fort, and half a mile off they perceived a little band returning in
good order.

Mr. Fogg was marching at their head, and just behind him were
Passepartout and the other two travellers, rescued from the Sioux.

They had met and fought the Indians ten miles south of Fort Kearney.
Shortly before the detachment arrived, Passepartout and his companions
had begun to struggle with their captors, three of whom the Frenchman
had felled with his fists, when his master and the soldiers hastened up
to their relief.

All were welcomed with joyful cries.  Phileas Fogg distributed the
reward he had promised to the soldiers, while Passepartout, not without
reason, muttered to himself, "It must certainly be confessed that I
cost my master dear!"

Fix, without saying a word, looked at Mr. Fogg, and it would have been
difficult to analyse the thoughts which struggled within him.  As for
Aouda, she took her protector's hand and pressed it in her own, too
much moved to speak.

Meanwhile, Passepartout was looking about for the train; he thought he
should find it there, ready to start for Omaha, and he hoped that the
time lost might be regained.

"The train! the train!" cried he.

"Gone," replied Fix.

"And when does the next train pass here?" said Phileas Fogg.

"Not till this evening."

"Ah!" returned the impassible gentleman quietly.




Chapter XXXI

IN WHICH FIX, THE DETECTIVE, CONSIDERABLY FURTHERS THE INTERESTS OF
PHILEAS FOGG


Phileas Fogg found himself twenty hours behind time.  Passepartout, the
involuntary cause of this delay, was desperate.  He had ruined his
master!

At this moment the detective approached Mr. Fogg, and, looking him
intently in the face, said:

"Seriously, sir, are you in great haste?"

"Quite seriously."

"I have a purpose in asking," resumed Fix.  "Is it absolutely necessary
that you should be in New York on the 11th, before nine o'clock in the
evening, the time that the steamer leaves for Liverpool?"

"It is absolutely necessary."

"And, if your journey had not been interrupted by these Indians, you
would have reached New York on the morning of the 11th?"

"Yes; with eleven hours to spare before the steamer left."

"Good! you are therefore twenty hours behind.  Twelve from twenty
leaves eight.  You must regain eight hours.  Do you wish to try to do
so?"

"On foot?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"No; on a sledge," replied Fix.  "On a sledge with sails.  A man has
proposed such a method to me."

It was the man who had spoken to Fix during the night, and whose offer
he had refused.

Phileas Fogg did not reply at once; but Fix, having pointed out the
man, who was walking up and down in front of the station, Mr. Fogg went
up to him.  An instant after, Mr. Fogg and the American, whose name was
Mudge, entered a hut built just below the fort.

There Mr. Fogg examined a curious vehicle, a kind of frame on two long
beams, a little raised in front like the runners of a sledge, and upon
which there was room for five or six persons.  A high mast was fixed on
the frame, held firmly by metallic lashings, to which was attached a
large brigantine sail.  This mast held an iron stay upon which to hoist
a jib-sail.  Behind, a sort of rudder served to guide the vehicle.  It
was, in short, a sledge rigged like a sloop.  During the winter, when
the trains are blocked up by the snow, these sledges make extremely
rapid journeys across the frozen plains from one station to another.
Provided with more sails than a cutter, and with the wind behind them,
they slip over the surface of the prairies with a speed equal if not
superior to that of the express trains.

Mr. Fogg readily made a bargain with the owner of this land-craft.  The
wind was favourable, being fresh, and blowing from the west.  The snow
had hardened, and Mudge was very confident of being able to transport
Mr. Fogg in a few hours to Omaha.  Thence the trains eastward run
frequently to Chicago and New York.  It was not impossible that the
lost time might yet be recovered; and such an opportunity was not to be
rejected.

Not wishing to expose Aouda to the discomforts of travelling in the
open air, Mr. Fogg proposed to leave her with Passepartout at Fort
Kearney, the servant taking upon himself to escort her to Europe by a
better route and under more favourable conditions.  But Aouda refused
to separate from Mr. Fogg, and Passepartout was delighted with her
decision; for nothing could induce him to leave his master while Fix
was with him.

It would be difficult to guess the detective's thoughts.  Was this
conviction shaken by Phileas Fogg's return, or did he still regard him
as an exceedingly shrewd rascal, who, his journey round the world
completed, would think himself absolutely safe in England?  Perhaps
Fix's opinion of Phileas Fogg was somewhat modified; but he was
nevertheless resolved to do his duty, and to hasten the return of the
whole party to England as much as possible.

At eight o'clock the sledge was ready to start.  The passengers took
their places on it, and wrapped themselves up closely in their
travelling-cloaks.  The two great sails were hoisted, and under the
pressure of the wind the sledge slid over the hardened snow with a
velocity of forty miles an hour.

The distance between Fort Kearney and Omaha, as the birds fly, is at
most two hundred miles.  If the wind held good, the distance might be
traversed in five hours; if no accident happened the sledge might reach
Omaha by one o'clock.

What a journey!  The travellers, huddled close together, could not
speak for the cold, intensified by the rapidity at which they were
going.  The sledge sped on as lightly as a boat over the waves.  When
the breeze came skimming the earth the sledge seemed to be lifted off
the ground by its sails.  Mudge, who was at the rudder, kept in a
straight line, and by a turn of his hand checked the lurches which the
vehicle had a tendency to make.  All the sails were up, and the jib was
so arranged as not to screen the brigantine.  A top-mast was hoisted,
and another jib, held out to the wind, added its force to the other
sails.  Although the speed could not be exactly estimated, the sledge
could not be going at less than forty miles an hour.

"If nothing breaks," said Mudge, "we shall get there!"

Mr. Fogg had made it for Mudge's interest to reach Omaha within the
time agreed on, by the offer of a handsome reward.

The prairie, across which the sledge was moving in a straight line, was
as flat as a sea.  It seemed like a vast frozen lake.  The railroad
which ran through this section ascended from the south-west to the
north-west by Great Island, Columbus, an important Nebraska town,
Schuyler, and Fremont, to Omaha.  It followed throughout the right bank
of the Platte River.  The sledge, shortening this route, took a chord
of the arc described by the railway.  Mudge was not afraid of being
stopped by the Platte River, because it was frozen.  The road, then,
was quite clear of obstacles, and Phileas Fogg had but two things to
fear--an accident to the sledge, and a change or calm in the wind.

But the breeze, far from lessening its force, blew as if to bend the
mast, which, however, the metallic lashings held firmly.  These
lashings, like the chords of a stringed instrument, resounded as if
vibrated by a violin bow.  The sledge slid along in the midst of a
plaintively intense melody.

"Those chords give the fifth and the octave," said Mr. Fogg.

These were the only words he uttered during the journey.  Aouda, cosily
packed in furs and cloaks, was sheltered as much as possible from the
attacks of the freezing wind.  As for Passepartout, his face was as red
as the sun's disc when it sets in the mist, and he laboriously inhaled
the biting air.  With his natural buoyancy of spirits, he began to hope
again.  They would reach New York on the evening, if not on the
morning, of the 11th, and there was still some chances that it would be
before the steamer sailed for Liverpool.

Passepartout even felt a strong desire to grasp his ally, Fix, by the
hand.  He remembered that it was the detective who procured the sledge,
the only means of reaching Omaha in time; but, checked by some
presentiment, he kept his usual reserve.  One thing, however,
Passepartout would never forget, and that was the sacrifice which Mr.
Fogg had made, without hesitation, to rescue him from the Sioux.  Mr.
Fogg had risked his fortune and his life. No!  His servant would never
forget that!

While each of the party was absorbed in reflections so different, the
sledge flew past over the vast carpet of snow.  The creeks it passed
over were not perceived.  Fields and streams disappeared under the
uniform whiteness.  The plain was absolutely deserted.  Between the
Union Pacific road and the branch which unites Kearney with Saint
Joseph it formed a great uninhabited island.  Neither village, station,
nor fort appeared.  From time to time they sped by some phantom-like
tree, whose white skeleton twisted and rattled in the wind.  Sometimes
flocks of wild birds rose, or bands of gaunt, famished, ferocious
prairie-wolves ran howling after the sledge.  Passepartout, revolver in
hand, held himself ready to fire on those which came too near.  Had an
accident then happened to the sledge, the travellers, attacked by these
beasts, would have been in the most terrible danger; but it held on its
even course, soon gained on the wolves, and ere long left the howling
band at a safe distance behind.

About noon Mudge perceived by certain landmarks that he was crossing
the Platte River.  He said nothing, but he felt certain that he was now
within twenty miles of Omaha.  In less than an hour he left the rudder
and furled his sails, whilst the sledge, carried forward by the great
impetus the wind had given it, went on half a mile further with its
sails unspread.

It stopped at last, and Mudge, pointing to a mass of roofs white with
snow, said: "We have got there!"

Arrived!  Arrived at the station which is in daily communication, by
numerous trains, with the Atlantic seaboard!

Passepartout and Fix jumped off, stretched their stiffened limbs, and
aided Mr. Fogg and the young woman to descend from the sledge.  Phileas
Fogg generously rewarded Mudge, whose hand Passepartout warmly grasped,
and the party directed their steps to the Omaha railway station.

The Pacific Railroad proper finds its terminus at this important
Nebraska town.  Omaha is connected with Chicago by the Chicago and Rock
Island Railroad, which runs directly east, and passes fifty stations.

A train was ready to start when Mr. Fogg and his party reached the
station, and they only had time to get into the cars.  They had seen
nothing of Omaha; but Passepartout confessed to himself that this was
not to be regretted, as they were not travelling to see the sights.

The train passed rapidly across the State of Iowa, by Council Bluffs,
Des Moines, and Iowa City.  During the night it crossed the Mississippi
at Davenport, and by Rock Island entered Illinois.  The next day, which
was the 10th, at four o'clock in the evening, it reached Chicago,
already risen from its ruins, and more proudly seated than ever on the
borders of its beautiful Lake Michigan.

Nine hundred miles separated Chicago from New York; but trains are not
wanting at Chicago.  Mr. Fogg passed at once from one to the other, and
the locomotive of the Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne, and Chicago Railway left
at full speed, as if it fully comprehended that that gentleman had no
time to lose.  It traversed Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey
like a flash, rushing through towns with antique names, some of which
had streets and car-tracks, but as yet no houses.  At last the Hudson
came into view; and, at a quarter-past eleven in the evening of the
11th, the train stopped in the station on the right bank of the river,
before the very pier of the Cunard line.

The China, for Liverpool, had started three-quarters of an hour before!




Chapter XXXII

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG ENGAGES IN A DIRECT STRUGGLE WITH BAD FORTUNE


The China, in leaving, seemed to have carried off Phileas Fogg's last
hope.  None of the other steamers were able to serve his projects.  The
Pereire, of the French Transatlantic Company, whose admirable steamers
are equal to any in speed and comfort, did not leave until the 14th;
the Hamburg boats did not go directly to Liverpool or London, but to
Havre; and the additional trip from Havre to Southampton would render
Phileas Fogg's last efforts of no avail.  The Inman steamer did not
depart till the next day, and could not cross the Atlantic in time to
save the wager.

Mr. Fogg learned all this in consulting his Bradshaw, which gave him
the daily movements of the trans-Atlantic steamers.

Passepartout was crushed; it overwhelmed him to lose the boat by
three-quarters of an hour.  It was his fault, for, instead of helping
his master, he had not ceased putting obstacles in his path!  And when
he recalled all the incidents of the tour, when he counted up the sums
expended in pure loss and on his own account, when he thought that the
immense stake, added to the heavy charges of this useless journey,
would completely ruin Mr. Fogg, he overwhelmed himself with bitter
self-accusations.  Mr. Fogg, however, did not reproach him; and, on
leaving the Cunard pier, only said: "We will consult about what is best
to-morrow.  Come."

The party crossed the Hudson in the Jersey City ferryboat, and drove in
a carriage to the St. Nicholas Hotel, on Broadway.  Rooms were engaged,
and the night passed, briefly to Phileas Fogg, who slept profoundly,
but very long to Aouda and the others, whose agitation did not permit
them to rest.

The next day was the 12th of December.  From seven in the morning of
the 12th to a quarter before nine in the evening of the 21st there were
nine days, thirteen hours, and forty-five minutes.  If Phileas Fogg had
left in the China, one of the fastest steamers on the Atlantic, he
would have reached Liverpool, and then London, within the period agreed
upon.

Mr. Fogg left the hotel alone, after giving Passepartout instructions
to await his return, and inform Aouda to be ready at an instant's
notice.  He proceeded to the banks of the Hudson, and looked about
among the vessels moored or anchored in the river, for any that were
about to depart.  Several had departure signals, and were preparing to
put to sea at morning tide; for in this immense and admirable port
there is not one day in a hundred that vessels do not set out for every
quarter of the globe.  But they were mostly sailing vessels, of which,
of course, Phileas Fogg could make no use.

He seemed about to give up all hope, when he espied, anchored at the
Battery, a cable's length off at most, a trading vessel, with a screw,
well-shaped, whose funnel, puffing a cloud of smoke, indicated that she
was getting ready for departure.

Phileas Fogg hailed a boat, got into it, and soon found himself on
board the Henrietta, iron-hulled, wood-built above.  He ascended to the
deck, and asked for the captain, who forthwith presented himself.  He
was a man of fifty, a sort of sea-wolf, with big eyes, a complexion of
oxidised copper, red hair and thick neck, and a growling voice.

"The captain?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"I am the captain."

"I am Phileas Fogg, of London."

"And I am Andrew Speedy, of Cardiff."

"You are going to put to sea?"

"In an hour."

"You are bound for--"

"Bordeaux."

"And your cargo?"

"No freight.  Going in ballast."

"Have you any passengers?"

"No passengers.  Never have passengers.  Too much in the way."

"Is your vessel a swift one?"

"Between eleven and twelve knots.  The Henrietta, well known."

"Will you carry me and three other persons to Liverpool?"

"To Liverpool?  Why not to China?"

"I said Liverpool."

"No!"

"No?"

"No.  I am setting out for Bordeaux, and shall go to Bordeaux."

"Money is no object?"

"None."

The captain spoke in a tone which did not admit of a reply.

"But the owners of the Henrietta--" resumed Phileas Fogg.

"The owners are myself," replied the captain.  "The vessel belongs to
me."

"I will freight it for you."

"No."

"I will buy it of you."

"No."

Phileas Fogg did not betray the least disappointment; but the situation
was a grave one.  It was not at New York as at Hong Kong, nor with the
captain of the Henrietta as with the captain of the Tankadere.  Up to
this time money had smoothed away every obstacle.  Now money failed.

Still, some means must be found to cross the Atlantic on a boat, unless
by balloon--which would have been venturesome, besides not being
capable of being put in practice.  It seemed that Phileas Fogg had an
idea, for he said to the captain, "Well, will you carry me to Bordeaux?"

"No, not if you paid me two hundred dollars."

"I offer you two thousand."

"Apiece?"

"Apiece."

"And there are four of you?"

"Four."

Captain Speedy began to scratch his head.  There were eight thousand
dollars to gain, without changing his route; for which it was well
worth conquering the repugnance he had for all kinds of passengers.
Besides, passengers at two thousand dollars are no longer passengers,
but valuable merchandise.  "I start at nine o'clock," said Captain
Speedy, simply.  "Are you and your party ready?"

"We will be on board at nine o'clock," replied, no less simply, Mr.
Fogg.

It was half-past eight.  To disembark from the Henrietta, jump into a
hack, hurry to the St. Nicholas, and return with Aouda, Passepartout,
and even the inseparable Fix was the work of a brief time, and was
performed by Mr. Fogg with the coolness which never abandoned him.
They were on board when the Henrietta made ready to weigh anchor.

When Passepartout heard what this last voyage was going to cost, he
uttered a prolonged "Oh!" which extended throughout his vocal gamut.

As for Fix, he said to himself that the Bank of England would certainly
not come out of this affair well indemnified.  When they reached
England, even if Mr. Fogg did not throw some handfuls of bank-bills
into the sea, more than seven thousand pounds would have been spent!




Chapter XXXIII

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SHOWS HIMSELF EQUAL TO THE OCCASION


An hour after, the Henrietta passed the lighthouse which marks the
entrance of the Hudson, turned the point of Sandy Hook, and put to sea.
During the day she skirted Long Island, passed Fire Island, and
directed her course rapidly eastward.

At noon the next day, a man mounted the bridge to ascertain the
vessel's position.  It might be thought that this was Captain Speedy.
Not the least in the world.  It was Phileas Fogg, Esquire.  As for
Captain Speedy, he was shut up in his cabin under lock and key, and was
uttering loud cries, which signified an anger at once pardonable and
excessive.

What had happened was very simple.  Phileas Fogg wished to go to
Liverpool, but the captain would not carry him there.  Then Phileas
Fogg had taken passage for Bordeaux, and, during the thirty hours he
had been on board, had so shrewdly managed with his banknotes that the
sailors and stokers, who were only an occasional crew, and were not on
the best terms with the captain, went over to him in a body.  This was
why Phileas Fogg was in command instead of Captain Speedy; why the
captain was a prisoner in his cabin; and why, in short, the Henrietta
was directing her course towards Liverpool.  It was very clear, to see
Mr. Fogg manage the craft, that he had been a sailor.

How the adventure ended will be seen anon.  Aouda was anxious, though
she said nothing.  As for Passepartout, he thought Mr. Fogg's manoeuvre
simply glorious.  The captain had said "between eleven and twelve
knots," and the Henrietta confirmed his prediction.

If, then--for there were "ifs" still--the sea did not become too
boisterous, if the wind did not veer round to the east, if no accident
happened to the boat or its machinery, the Henrietta might cross the
three thousand miles from New York to Liverpool in the nine days,
between the 12th and the 21st of December.  It is true that, once
arrived, the affair on board the Henrietta, added to that of the Bank
of England, might create more difficulties for Mr. Fogg than he
imagined or could desire.

During the first days, they went along smoothly enough.  The sea was
not very unpropitious, the wind seemed stationary in the north-east,
the sails were hoisted, and the Henrietta ploughed across the waves
like a real trans-Atlantic steamer.

Passepartout was delighted.  His master's last exploit, the
consequences of which he ignored, enchanted him.  Never had the crew
seen so jolly and dexterous a fellow.  He formed warm friendships with
the sailors, and amazed them with his acrobatic feats.  He thought they
managed the vessel like gentlemen, and that the stokers fired up like
heroes.  His loquacious good-humour infected everyone.  He had
forgotten the past, its vexations and delays.  He only thought of the
end, so nearly accomplished; and sometimes he boiled over with
impatience, as if heated by the furnaces of the Henrietta.  Often,
also, the worthy fellow revolved around Fix, looking at him with a
keen, distrustful eye; but he did not speak to him, for their old
intimacy no longer existed.

Fix, it must be confessed, understood nothing of what was going on.
The conquest of the Henrietta, the bribery of the crew, Fogg managing
the boat like a skilled seaman, amazed and confused him.  He did not
know what to think.  For, after all, a man who began by stealing
fifty-five thousand pounds might end by stealing a vessel; and Fix was
not unnaturally inclined to conclude that the Henrietta under Fogg's
command, was not going to Liverpool at all, but to some part of the
world where the robber, turned into a pirate, would quietly put himself
in safety.  The conjecture was at least a plausible one, and the
detective began to seriously regret that he had embarked on the affair.

As for Captain Speedy, he continued to howl and growl in his cabin; and
Passepartout, whose duty it was to carry him his meals, courageous as
he was, took the greatest precautions.  Mr. Fogg did not seem even to
know that there was a captain on board.

On the 13th they passed the edge of the Banks of Newfoundland, a
dangerous locality; during the winter, especially, there are frequent
fogs and heavy gales of wind.  Ever since the evening before the
barometer, suddenly falling, had indicated an approaching change in the
atmosphere; and during the night the temperature varied, the cold
became sharper, and the wind veered to the south-east.

This was a misfortune.  Mr. Fogg, in order not to deviate from his
course, furled his sails and increased the force of the steam; but the
vessel's speed slackened, owing to the state of the sea, the long waves
of which broke against the stern.  She pitched violently, and this
retarded her progress.  The breeze little by little swelled into a
tempest, and it was to be feared that the Henrietta might not be able
to maintain herself upright on the waves.

Passepartout's visage darkened with the skies, and for two days the
poor fellow experienced constant fright.  But Phileas Fogg was a bold
mariner, and knew how to maintain headway against the sea; and he kept
on his course, without even decreasing his steam.  The Henrietta, when
she could not rise upon the waves, crossed them, swamping her deck, but
passing safely.  Sometimes the screw rose out of the water, beating its
protruding end, when a mountain of water raised the stern above the
waves; but the craft always kept straight ahead.

The wind, however, did not grow as boisterous as might have been
feared; it was not one of those tempests which burst, and rush on with
a speed of ninety miles an hour.  It continued fresh, but, unhappily,
it remained obstinately in the south-east, rendering the sails useless.

The 16th of December was the seventy-fifth day since Phileas Fogg's
departure from London, and the Henrietta had not yet been seriously
delayed.  Half of the voyage was almost accomplished, and the worst
localities had been passed.  In summer, success would have been
well-nigh certain.  In winter, they were at the mercy of the bad
season.  Passepartout said nothing; but he cherished hope in secret,
and comforted himself with the reflection that, if the wind failed
them, they might still count on the steam.

On this day the engineer came on deck, went up to Mr. Fogg, and began
to speak earnestly with him.  Without knowing why it was a
presentiment, perhaps Passepartout became vaguely uneasy.  He would
have given one of his ears to hear with the other what the engineer was
saying.  He finally managed to catch a few words, and was sure he heard
his master say, "You are certain of what you tell me?"

"Certain, sir," replied the engineer.  "You must remember that, since
we started, we have kept up hot fires in all our furnaces, and, though
we had coal enough to go on short steam from New York to Bordeaux, we
haven't enough to go with all steam from New York to Liverpool." "I
will consider," replied Mr. Fogg.

Passepartout understood it all; he was seized with mortal anxiety.  The
coal was giving out!  "Ah, if my master can get over that," muttered
he, "he'll be a famous man!"  He could not help imparting to Fix what
he had overheard.

"Then you believe that we really are going to Liverpool?"

"Of course."

"Ass!" replied the detective, shrugging his shoulders and turning on
his heel.

Passepartout was on the point of vigorously resenting the epithet, the
reason of which he could not for the life of him comprehend; but he
reflected that the unfortunate Fix was probably very much disappointed
and humiliated in his self-esteem, after having so awkwardly followed a
false scent around the world, and refrained.

And now what course would Phileas Fogg adopt?  It was difficult to
imagine.  Nevertheless he seemed to have decided upon one, for that
evening he sent for the engineer, and said to him, "Feed all the fires
until the coal is exhausted."

A few moments after, the funnel of the Henrietta vomited forth torrents
of smoke.  The vessel continued to proceed with all steam on; but on
the 18th, the engineer, as he had predicted, announced that the coal
would give out in the course of the day.

"Do not let the fires go down," replied Mr. Fogg.  "Keep them up to the
last.  Let the valves be filled."

Towards noon Phileas Fogg, having ascertained their position, called
Passepartout, and ordered him to go for Captain Speedy.  It was as if
the honest fellow had been commanded to unchain a tiger.  He went to
the poop, saying to himself, "He will be like a madman!"

In a few moments, with cries and oaths, a bomb appeared on the
poop-deck.  The bomb was Captain Speedy.  It was clear that he was on
the point of bursting.  "Where are we?"  were the first words his anger
permitted him to utter.  Had the poor man been an apoplectic, he could
never have recovered from his paroxysm of wrath.

"Where are we?" he repeated, with purple face.

"Seven hundred and seven miles from Liverpool," replied Mr. Fogg, with
imperturbable calmness.

"Pirate!" cried Captain Speedy.

"I have sent for you, sir--"

"Pickaroon!"

"--sir," continued Mr. Fogg, "to ask you to sell me your vessel."

"No!  By all the devils, no!"

"But I shall be obliged to burn her."

"Burn the Henrietta!"

"Yes; at least the upper part of her.  The coal has given out."

"Burn my vessel!" cried Captain Speedy, who could scarcely pronounce
the words.  "A vessel worth fifty thousand dollars!"

"Here are sixty thousand," replied Phileas Fogg, handing the captain a
roll of bank-bills.  This had a prodigious effect on Andrew Speedy.  An
American can scarcely remain unmoved at the sight of sixty thousand
dollars.  The captain forgot in an instant his anger, his imprisonment,
and all his grudges against his passenger.  The Henrietta was twenty
years old; it was a great bargain.  The bomb would not go off after
all.  Mr. Fogg had taken away the match.

"And I shall still have the iron hull," said the captain in a softer
tone.

"The iron hull and the engine.  Is it agreed?"

"Agreed."

And Andrew Speedy, seizing the banknotes, counted them and consigned
them to his pocket.

During this colloquy, Passepartout was as white as a sheet, and Fix
seemed on the point of having an apoplectic fit.  Nearly twenty
thousand pounds had been expended, and Fogg left the hull and engine to
the captain, that is, near the whole value of the craft!  It was true,
however, that fifty-five thousand pounds had been stolen from the Bank.

When Andrew Speedy had pocketed the money, Mr. Fogg said to him, "Don't
let this astonish you, sir.  You must know that I shall lose twenty
thousand pounds, unless I arrive in London by a quarter before nine on
the evening of the 21st of December.  I missed the steamer at New York,
and as you refused to take me to Liverpool--"

"And I did well!" cried Andrew Speedy; "for I have gained at least
forty thousand dollars by it!"  He added, more sedately, "Do you know
one thing, Captain--"

"Fogg."

"Captain Fogg, you've got something of the Yankee about you."

And, having paid his passenger what he considered a high compliment, he
was going away, when Mr. Fogg said, "The vessel now belongs to me?"

"Certainly, from the keel to the truck of the masts--all the wood, that
is."

"Very well.  Have the interior seats, bunks, and frames pulled down,
and burn them."

It was necessary to have dry wood to keep the steam up to the adequate
pressure, and on that day the poop, cabins, bunks, and the spare deck
were sacrificed.  On the next day, the 19th of December, the masts,
rafts, and spars were burned; the crew worked lustily, keeping up the
fires.  Passepartout hewed, cut, and sawed away with all his might.
There was a perfect rage for demolition.

The railings, fittings, the greater part of the deck, and top sides
disappeared on the 20th, and the Henrietta was now only a flat hulk.
But on this day they sighted the Irish coast and Fastnet Light.  By ten
in the evening they were passing Queenstown.  Phileas Fogg had only
twenty-four hours more in which to get to London; that length of time
was necessary to reach Liverpool, with all steam on.  And the steam was
about to give out altogether!

"Sir," said Captain Speedy, who was now deeply interested in Mr. Fogg's
project, "I really commiserate you.  Everything is against you.  We are
only opposite Queenstown."

"Ah," said Mr. Fogg, "is that place where we see the lights Queenstown?"

"Yes."

"Can we enter the harbour?"

"Not under three hours.  Only at high tide."

"Stay," replied Mr. Fogg calmly, without betraying in his features that
by a supreme inspiration he was about to attempt once more to conquer
ill-fortune.

Queenstown is the Irish port at which the trans-Atlantic steamers stop
to put off the mails.  These mails are carried to Dublin by express
trains always held in readiness to start; from Dublin they are sent on
to Liverpool by the most rapid boats, and thus gain twelve hours on the
Atlantic steamers.

Phileas Fogg counted on gaining twelve hours in the same way.  Instead
of arriving at Liverpool the next evening by the Henrietta, he would be
there by noon, and would therefore have time to reach London before a
quarter before nine in the evening.

The Henrietta entered Queenstown Harbour at one o'clock in the morning,
it then being high tide; and Phileas Fogg, after being grasped heartily
by the hand by Captain Speedy, left that gentleman on the levelled hulk
of his craft, which was still worth half what he had sold it for.

The party went on shore at once.  Fix was greatly tempted to arrest Mr.
Fogg on the spot; but he did not.  Why?  What struggle was going on
within him?  Had he changed his mind about "his man"?  Did he
understand that he had made a grave mistake?  He did not, however,
abandon Mr. Fogg.  They all got upon the train, which was just ready to
start, at half-past one; at dawn of day they were in Dublin; and they
lost no time in embarking on a steamer which, disdaining to rise upon
the waves, invariably cut through them.

Phileas Fogg at last disembarked on the Liverpool quay, at twenty
minutes before twelve, 21st December.  He was only six hours distant
from London.

But at this moment Fix came up, put his hand upon Mr. Fogg's shoulder,
and, showing his warrant, said, "You are really Phileas Fogg?"

"I am."

"I arrest you in the Queen's name!"




Chapter XXXIV

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AT LAST REACHES LONDON


Phileas Fogg was in prison.  He had been shut up in the Custom House,
and he was to be transferred to London the next day.

Passepartout, when he saw his master arrested, would have fallen upon
Fix had he not been held back by some policemen.  Aouda was
thunderstruck at the suddenness of an event which she could not
understand.  Passepartout explained to her how it was that the honest
and courageous Fogg was arrested as a robber.  The young woman's heart
revolted against so heinous a charge, and when she saw that she could
attempt to do nothing to save her protector, she wept bitterly.

As for Fix, he had arrested Mr. Fogg because it was his duty, whether
Mr. Fogg were guilty or not.

The thought then struck Passepartout, that he was the cause of this new
misfortune!  Had he not concealed Fix's errand from his master?  When
Fix revealed his true character and purpose, why had he not told Mr.
Fogg?  If the latter had been warned, he would no doubt have given Fix
proof of his innocence, and satisfied him of his mistake; at least, Fix
would not have continued his journey at the expense and on the heels of
his master, only to arrest him the moment he set foot on English soil.
Passepartout wept till he was blind, and felt like blowing his brains
out.

Aouda and he had remained, despite the cold, under the portico of the
Custom House.  Neither wished to leave the place; both were anxious to
see Mr. Fogg again.

That gentleman was really ruined, and that at the moment when he was
about to attain his end.  This arrest was fatal.  Having arrived at
Liverpool at twenty minutes before twelve on the 21st of December, he
had till a quarter before nine that evening to reach the Reform Club,
that is, nine hours and a quarter; the journey from Liverpool to London
was six hours.

If anyone, at this moment, had entered the Custom House, he would have
found Mr. Fogg seated, motionless, calm, and without apparent anger,
upon a wooden bench.  He was not, it is true, resigned; but this last
blow failed to force him into an outward betrayal of any emotion.  Was
he being devoured by one of those secret rages, all the more terrible
because contained, and which only burst forth, with an irresistible
force, at the last moment?  No one could tell.  There he sat, calmly
waiting--for what?  Did he still cherish hope?  Did he still believe,
now that the door of this prison was closed upon him, that he would
succeed?

However that may have been, Mr. Fogg carefully put his watch upon the
table, and observed its advancing hands.  Not a word escaped his lips,
but his look was singularly set and stern.  The situation, in any
event, was a terrible one, and might be thus stated: if Phileas Fogg
was honest he was ruined; if he was a knave, he was caught.

Did escape occur to him?  Did he examine to see if there were any
practicable outlet from his prison?  Did he think of escaping from it?
Possibly; for once he walked slowly around the room.  But the door was
locked, and the window heavily barred with iron rods.  He sat down
again, and drew his journal from his pocket.  On the line where these
words were written, "21st December, Saturday, Liverpool," he added,
"80th day, 11.40 a.m.," and waited.

The Custom House clock struck one.  Mr. Fogg observed that his watch
was two hours too fast.

Two hours!  Admitting that he was at this moment taking an express
train, he could reach London and the Reform Club by a quarter before
nine, p.m.  His forehead slightly wrinkled.

At thirty-three minutes past two he heard a singular noise outside,
then a hasty opening of doors.  Passepartout's voice was audible, and
immediately after that of Fix.  Phileas Fogg's eyes brightened for an
instant.

The door swung open, and he saw Passepartout, Aouda, and Fix, who
hurried towards him.

Fix was out of breath, and his hair was in disorder.  He could not
speak.  "Sir," he stammered, "sir--forgive me--most--unfortunate
resemblance--robber arrested three days ago--you are free!"

Phileas Fogg was free!  He walked to the detective, looked him steadily
in the face, and with the only rapid motion he had ever made in his
life, or which he ever would make, drew back his arms, and with the
precision of a machine knocked Fix down.

"Well hit!" cried Passepartout, "Parbleu! that's what you might call a
good application of English fists!"

Fix, who found himself on the floor, did not utter a word.  He had only
received his deserts.  Mr. Fogg, Aouda, and Passepartout left the
Custom House without delay, got into a cab, and in a few moments
descended at the station.

Phileas Fogg asked if there was an express train about to leave for
London.  It was forty minutes past two.  The express train had left
thirty-five minutes before.  Phileas Fogg then ordered a special train.

There were several rapid locomotives on hand; but the railway
arrangements did not permit the special train to leave until three
o'clock.

At that hour Phileas Fogg, having stimulated the engineer by the offer
of a generous reward, at last set out towards London with Aouda and his
faithful servant.

It was necessary to make the journey in five hours and a half; and this
would have been easy on a clear road throughout.  But there were forced
delays, and when Mr. Fogg stepped from the train at the terminus, all
the clocks in London were striking ten minutes before nine.

Having made the tour of the world, he was behind-hand five minutes.  He
had lost the wager!




Chapter XXXV

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG DOES NOT HAVE TO REPEAT HIS ORDERS TO
PASSEPARTOUT TWICE


The dwellers in Saville Row would have been surprised the next day, if
they had been told that Phileas Fogg had returned home.  His doors and
windows were still closed, no appearance of change was visible.

After leaving the station, Mr. Fogg gave Passepartout instructions to
purchase some provisions, and quietly went to his domicile.

He bore his misfortune with his habitual tranquillity.  Ruined!  And by
the blundering of the detective!  After having steadily traversed that
long journey, overcome a hundred obstacles, braved many dangers, and
still found time to do some good on his way, to fail near the goal by a
sudden event which he could not have foreseen, and against which he was
unarmed; it was terrible!  But a few pounds were left of the large sum
he had carried with him.  There only remained of his fortune the twenty
thousand pounds deposited at Barings, and this amount he owed to his
friends of the Reform Club.  So great had been the expense of his tour
that, even had he won, it would not have enriched him; and it is
probable that he had not sought to enrich himself, being a man who
rather laid wagers for honour's sake than for the stake proposed.  But
this wager totally ruined him.

Mr. Fogg's course, however, was fully decided upon; he knew what
remained for him to do.

A room in the house in Saville Row was set apart for Aouda, who was
overwhelmed with grief at her protector's misfortune.  From the words
which Mr. Fogg dropped, she saw that he was meditating some serious
project.

Knowing that Englishmen governed by a fixed idea sometimes resort to
the desperate expedient of suicide, Passepartout kept a narrow watch
upon his master, though he carefully concealed the appearance of so
doing.

First of all, the worthy fellow had gone up to his room, and had
extinguished the gas burner, which had been burning for eighty days.
He had found in the letter-box a bill from the gas company, and he
thought it more than time to put a stop to this expense, which he had
been doomed to bear.

The night passed.  Mr. Fogg went to bed, but did he sleep?  Aouda did
not once close her eyes.  Passepartout watched all night, like a
faithful dog, at his master's door.

Mr. Fogg called him in the morning, and told him to get Aouda's
breakfast, and a cup of tea and a chop for himself.  He desired Aouda
to excuse him from breakfast and dinner, as his time would be absorbed
all day in putting his affairs to rights.  In the evening he would ask
permission to have a few moment's conversation with the young lady.

Passepartout, having received his orders, had nothing to do but obey
them.  He looked at his imperturbable master, and could scarcely bring
his mind to leave him.  His heart was full, and his conscience tortured
by remorse; for he accused himself more bitterly than ever of being the
cause of the irretrievable disaster.  Yes! if he had warned Mr. Fogg,
and had betrayed Fix's projects to him, his master would certainly not
have given the detective passage to Liverpool, and then--

Passepartout could hold in no longer.

"My master!  Mr. Fogg!" he cried, "why do you not curse me?  It was my
fault that--"

"I blame no one," returned Phileas Fogg, with perfect calmness.  "Go!"

Passepartout left the room, and went to find Aouda, to whom he
delivered his master's message.

"Madam," he added, "I can do nothing myself--nothing!  I have no
influence over my master; but you, perhaps--"

"What influence could I have?" replied Aouda.  "Mr. Fogg is influenced
by no one.  Has he ever understood that my gratitude to him is
overflowing?  Has he ever read my heart?  My friend, he must not be
left alone an instant!  You say he is going to speak with me this
evening?"

"Yes, madam; probably to arrange for your protection and comfort in
England."

"We shall see," replied Aouda, becoming suddenly pensive.

Throughout this day (Sunday) the house in Saville Row was as if
uninhabited, and Phileas Fogg, for the first time since he had lived in
that house, did not set out for his club when Westminster clock struck
half-past eleven.

Why should he present himself at the Reform?  His friends no longer
expected him there.  As Phileas Fogg had not appeared in the saloon on
the evening before (Saturday, the 21st of December, at a quarter before
nine), he had lost his wager.  It was not even necessary that he should
go to his bankers for the twenty thousand pounds; for his antagonists
already had his cheque in their hands, and they had only to fill it out
and send it to the Barings to have the amount transferred to their
credit.

Mr. Fogg, therefore, had no reason for going out, and so he remained at
home.  He shut himself up in his room, and busied himself putting his
affairs in order.  Passepartout continually ascended and descended the
stairs.  The hours were long for him. He listened at his master's door,
and looked through the keyhole, as if he had a perfect right so to do,
and as if he feared that something terrible might happen at any moment.
Sometimes he thought of Fix, but no longer in anger.  Fix, like all the
world, had been mistaken in Phileas Fogg, and had only done his duty in
tracking and arresting him; while he, Passepartout. . . .  This thought
haunted him, and he never ceased cursing his miserable folly.

Finding himself too wretched to remain alone, he knocked at Aouda's
door, went into her room, seated himself, without speaking, in a
corner, and looked ruefully at the young woman. Aouda was still pensive.

About half-past seven in the evening Mr. Fogg sent to know if Aouda
would receive him, and in a few moments he found himself alone with her.

Phileas Fogg took a chair, and sat down near the fireplace, opposite
Aouda.  No emotion was visible on his face.  Fogg returned was exactly
the Fogg who had gone away; there was the same calm, the same
impassibility.

He sat several minutes without speaking; then, bending his eyes on
Aouda, "Madam," said he, "will you pardon me for bringing you to
England?"

"I, Mr. Fogg!" replied Aouda, checking the pulsations of her heart.

"Please let me finish," returned Mr. Fogg.  "When I decided to bring
you far away from the country which was so unsafe for you, I was rich,
and counted on putting a portion of my fortune at your disposal; then
your existence would have been free and happy.  But now I am ruined."

"I know it, Mr. Fogg," replied Aouda; "and I ask you in my turn, will
you forgive me for having followed you, and--who knows?--for having,
perhaps, delayed you, and thus contributed to your ruin?"

"Madam, you could not remain in India, and your safety could only be
assured by bringing you to such a distance that your persecutors could
not take you."

"So, Mr. Fogg," resumed Aouda, "not content with rescuing me from a
terrible death, you thought yourself bound to secure my comfort in a
foreign land?"

"Yes, madam; but circumstances have been against me.  Still, I beg to
place the little I have left at your service."

"But what will become of you, Mr. Fogg?"

"As for me, madam," replied the gentleman, coldly, "I have need of
nothing."

"But how do you look upon the fate, sir, which awaits you?"

"As I am in the habit of doing."

"At least," said Aouda, "want should not overtake a man like you.  Your
friends--"

"I have no friends, madam."

"Your relatives--"

"I have no longer any relatives."

"I pity you, then, Mr. Fogg, for solitude is a sad thing, with no heart
to which to confide your griefs.  They say, though, that misery itself,
shared by two sympathetic souls, may be borne with patience."

"They say so, madam."

"Mr. Fogg," said Aouda, rising and seizing his hand, "do you wish at
once a kinswoman and friend?  Will you have me for your wife?"

Mr. Fogg, at this, rose in his turn.  There was an unwonted light in
his eyes, and a slight trembling of his lips.  Aouda looked into his
face.  The sincerity, rectitude, firmness, and sweetness of this soft
glance of a noble woman, who could dare all to save him to whom she
owed all, at first astonished, then penetrated him.  He shut his eyes
for an instant, as if to avoid her look.  When he opened them again, "I
love you!" he said, simply.  "Yes, by all that is holiest, I love you,
and I am entirely yours!"

"Ah!" cried Aouda, pressing his hand to her heart.

Passepartout was summoned and appeared immediately.  Mr. Fogg still
held Aouda's hand in his own; Passepartout understood, and his big,
round face became as radiant as the tropical sun at its zenith.

Mr. Fogg asked him if it was not too late to notify the Reverend Samuel
Wilson, of Marylebone parish, that evening.

Passepartout smiled his most genial smile, and said, "Never too late."

It was five minutes past eight.

"Will it be for to-morrow, Monday?"

"For to-morrow, Monday," said Mr. Fogg, turning to Aouda.

"Yes; for to-morrow, Monday," she replied.

Passepartout hurried off as fast as his legs could carry him.




Chapter XXXVI

IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG'S NAME IS ONCE MORE AT A PREMIUM ON 'CHANGE


It is time to relate what a change took place in English public opinion
when it transpired that the real bankrobber, a certain James Strand,
had been arrested, on the 17th day of December, at Edinburgh.  Three
days before, Phileas Fogg had been a criminal, who was being
desperately followed up by the police; now he was an honourable
gentleman, mathematically pursuing his eccentric journey round the
world.

The papers resumed their discussion about the wager; all those who had
laid bets, for or against him, revived their interest, as if by magic;
the "Phileas Fogg bonds" again became negotiable, and many new wagers
were made.  Phileas Fogg's name was once more at a premium on 'Change.

His five friends of the Reform Club passed these three days in a state
of feverish suspense.  Would Phileas Fogg, whom they had forgotten,
reappear before their eyes!  Where was he at this moment?  The 17th of
December, the day of James Strand's arrest, was the seventy-sixth since
Phileas Fogg's departure, and no news of him had been received.  Was he
dead?  Had he abandoned the effort, or was he continuing his journey
along the route agreed upon?  And would he appear on Saturday, the 21st
of December, at a quarter before nine in the evening, on the threshold
of the Reform Club saloon?

The anxiety in which, for three days, London society existed, cannot be
described.  Telegrams were sent to America and Asia for news of Phileas
Fogg.  Messengers were dispatched to the house in Saville Row morning
and evening.  No news.  The police were ignorant what had become of the
detective, Fix, who had so unfortunately followed up a false scent.
Bets increased, nevertheless, in number and value.  Phileas Fogg, like
a racehorse, was drawing near his last turning-point.  The bonds were
quoted, no longer at a hundred below par, but at twenty, at ten, and at
five; and paralytic old Lord Albemarle bet even in his favour.

A great crowd was collected in Pall Mall and the neighbouring streets
on Saturday evening; it seemed like a multitude of brokers permanently
established around the Reform Club.  Circulation was impeded, and
everywhere disputes, discussions, and financial transactions were going
on.  The police had great difficulty in keeping back the crowd, and as
the hour when Phileas Fogg was due approached, the excitement rose to
its highest pitch.

The five antagonists of Phileas Fogg had met in the great saloon of the
club.  John Sullivan and Samuel Fallentin, the bankers, Andrew Stuart,
the engineer, Gauthier Ralph, the director of the Bank of England, and
Thomas Flanagan, the brewer, one and all waited anxiously.

When the clock indicated twenty minutes past eight, Andrew Stuart got
up, saying, "Gentlemen, in twenty minutes the time agreed upon between
Mr. Fogg and ourselves will have expired."

"What time did the last train arrive from Liverpool?"  asked Thomas
Flanagan.

"At twenty-three minutes past seven," replied Gauthier Ralph; "and the
next does not arrive till ten minutes after twelve."

"Well, gentlemen," resumed Andrew Stuart, "if Phileas Fogg had come in
the 7:23 train, he would have got here by this time.  We can,
therefore, regard the bet as won."

"Wait; don't let us be too hasty," replied Samuel Fallentin.  "You know
that Mr. Fogg is very eccentric.  His punctuality is well known; he
never arrives too soon, or too late; and I should not be surprised if
he appeared before us at the last minute."

"Why," said Andrew Stuart nervously, "if I should see him, I should not
believe it was he."

"The fact is," resumed Thomas Flanagan, "Mr. Fogg's project was
absurdly foolish.  Whatever his punctuality, he could not prevent the
delays which were certain to occur; and a delay of only two or three
days would be fatal to his tour."

"Observe, too," added John Sullivan, "that we have received no
intelligence from him, though there are telegraphic lines all along his
route."

"He has lost, gentleman," said Andrew Stuart, "he has a hundred times
lost!  You know, besides, that the China the only steamer he could have
taken from New York to get here in time arrived yesterday.  I have seen
a list of the passengers, and the name of Phileas Fogg is not among
them.  Even if we admit that fortune has favoured him, he can scarcely
have reached America.  I think he will be at least twenty days
behind-hand, and that Lord Albemarle will lose a cool five thousand."

"It is clear," replied Gauthier Ralph; "and we have nothing to do but
to present Mr. Fogg's cheque at Barings to-morrow."

At this moment, the hands of the club clock pointed to twenty minutes
to nine.

"Five minutes more," said Andrew Stuart.

The five gentlemen looked at each other.  Their anxiety was becoming
intense; but, not wishing to betray it, they readily assented to Mr.
Fallentin's proposal of a rubber.

"I wouldn't give up my four thousand of the bet," said Andrew Stuart,
as he took his seat, "for three thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine."

The clock indicated eighteen minutes to nine.

The players took up their cards, but could not keep their eyes off the
clock.  Certainly, however secure they felt, minutes had never seemed
so long to them!

"Seventeen minutes to nine," said Thomas Flanagan, as he cut the cards
which Ralph handed to him.

Then there was a moment of silence.  The great saloon was perfectly
quiet; but the murmurs of the crowd outside were heard, with now and
then a shrill cry.  The pendulum beat the seconds, which each player
eagerly counted, as he listened, with mathematical regularity.

"Sixteen minutes to nine!" said John Sullivan, in a voice which
betrayed his emotion.

One minute more, and the wager would be won.  Andrew Stuart and his
partners suspended their game.  They left their cards, and counted the
seconds.

At the fortieth second, nothing.  At the fiftieth, still nothing.

At the fifty-fifth, a loud cry was heard in the street, followed by
applause, hurrahs, and some fierce growls.

The players rose from their seats.

At the fifty-seventh second the door of the saloon opened; and the
pendulum had not beat the sixtieth second when Phileas Fogg appeared,
followed by an excited crowd who had forced their way through the club
doors, and in his calm voice, said, "Here I am, gentlemen!"




Chapter XXXVII

IN WHICH IT IS SHOWN THAT PHILEAS FOGG GAINED NOTHING BY HIS TOUR
AROUND THE WORLD, UNLESS IT WERE HAPPINESS


Yes; Phileas Fogg in person.

The reader will remember that at five minutes past eight in the
evening--about five and twenty hours after the arrival of the
travellers in London--Passepartout had been sent by his master to
engage the services of the Reverend Samuel Wilson in a certain marriage
ceremony, which was to take place the next day.

Passepartout went on his errand enchanted.  He soon reached the
clergyman's house, but found him not at home.  Passepartout waited a
good twenty minutes, and when he left the reverend gentleman, it was
thirty-five minutes past eight.  But in what a state he was!  With his
hair in disorder, and without his hat, he ran along the street as never
man was seen to run before, overturning passers-by, rushing over the
sidewalk like a waterspout.

In three minutes he was in Saville Row again, and staggered back into
Mr. Fogg's room.

He could not speak.

"What is the matter?" asked Mr. Fogg.

"My master!" gasped Passepartout--"marriage--impossible--"

"Impossible?"

"Impossible--for to-morrow."

"Why so?"

"Because to-morrow--is Sunday!"

"Monday," replied Mr. Fogg.

"No--to-day is Saturday."

"Saturday?  Impossible!"

"Yes, yes, yes, yes!" cried Passepartout.  "You have made a mistake of
one day!  We arrived twenty-four hours ahead of time; but there are
only ten minutes left!"

Passepartout had seized his master by the collar, and was dragging him
along with irresistible force.

Phileas Fogg, thus kidnapped, without having time to think, left his
house, jumped into a cab, promised a hundred pounds to the cabman, and,
having run over two dogs and overturned five carriages, reached the
Reform Club.

The clock indicated a quarter before nine when he appeared in the great
saloon.

Phileas Fogg had accomplished the journey round the world in eighty
days!

Phileas Fogg had won his wager of twenty thousand pounds!

How was it that a man so exact and fastidious could have made this
error of a day?  How came he to think that he had arrived in London on
Saturday, the twenty-first day of December, when it was really Friday,
the twentieth, the seventy-ninth day only from his departure?

The cause of the error is very simple.

Phileas Fogg had, without suspecting it, gained one day on his journey,
and this merely because he had travelled constantly eastward; he would,
on the contrary, have lost a day had he gone in the opposite direction,
that is, westward.

In journeying eastward he had gone towards the sun, and the days
therefore diminished for him as many times four minutes as he crossed
degrees in this direction.  There are three hundred and sixty degrees
on the circumference of the earth; and these three hundred and sixty
degrees, multiplied by four minutes, gives precisely twenty-four
hours--that is, the day unconsciously gained.  In other words, while
Phileas Fogg, going eastward, saw the sun pass the meridian eighty
times, his friends in London only saw it pass the meridian seventy-nine
times.  This is why they awaited him at the Reform Club on Saturday,
and not Sunday, as Mr. Fogg thought.

And Passepartout's famous family watch, which had always kept London
time, would have betrayed this fact, if it had marked the days as well
as the hours and the minutes!

Phileas Fogg, then, had won the twenty thousand pounds; but, as he had
spent nearly nineteen thousand on the way, the pecuniary gain was
small.  His object was, however, to be victorious, and not to win
money.  He divided the one thousand pounds that remained between
Passepartout and the unfortunate Fix, against whom he cherished no
grudge.  He deducted, however, from Passepartout's share the cost of
the gas which had burned in his room for nineteen hundred and twenty
hours, for the sake of regularity.

That evening, Mr. Fogg, as tranquil and phlegmatic as ever, said to
Aouda: "Is our marriage still agreeable to you?"

"Mr. Fogg," replied she, "it is for me to ask that question.  You were
ruined, but now you are rich again."

"Pardon me, madam; my fortune belongs to you.  If you had not suggested
our marriage, my servant would not have gone to the Reverend Samuel
Wilson's, I should not have been apprised of my error, and--"

"Dear Mr. Fogg!" said the young woman.

"Dear Aouda!" replied Phileas Fogg.

It need not be said that the marriage took place forty-eight hours
after, and that Passepartout, glowing and dazzling, gave the bride
away.  Had he not saved her, and was he not entitled to this honour?

The next day, as soon as it was light, Passepartout rapped vigorously
at his master's door.  Mr. Fogg opened it, and asked, "What's the
matter, Passepartout?"

"What is it, sir?  Why, I've just this instant found out--"

"What?"

"That we might have made the tour of the world in only seventy-eight
days."

"No doubt," returned Mr. Fogg, "by not crossing India.  But if I had
not crossed India, I should not have saved Aouda; she would not have
been my wife, and--"

Mr. Fogg quietly shut the door.

Phileas Fogg had won his wager, and had made his journey around the
world in eighty days.  To do this he had employed every means of
conveyance--steamers, railways, carriages, yachts, trading-vessels,
sledges, elephants.  The eccentric gentleman had throughout displayed
all his marvellous qualities of coolness and exactitude.  But what
then?  What had he really gained by all this trouble?  What had he
brought back from this long and weary journey?

Nothing, say you?  Perhaps so; nothing but a charming woman, who,
strange as it may appear, made him the happiest of men!

Truly, would you not for less than that make the tour around the world?









End of Project Gutenberg's Around the World in 80 Days, by Jules Verne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AROUND THE WORLD IN 80 DAYS ***

***** This file should be named 103.txt or 103.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/103/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


CHAPTER I.


"What time is it?" inquired Dame Hansen, shaking the ashes from her
pipe, the last curling rings from which were slowly disappearing
between the stained rafters overhead.

"Eight o'clock, mother," replied Hulda.

"It isn't likely that any travelers will come to-night. The weather is
too stormy."

"I agree with you. At all events, the rooms are in readiness, and if
any one comes, I shall be sure to hear them."

"Has your brother returned?"

"Not yet."

"Didn't he say he would be back to-night?"

"No, mother. Joel went to take a traveler to Lake Tinn, and as he
didn't start until very late, I do not think he can get back to Dal
before to-morrow."

"Then he will spend the night at Moel, probably."

"Yes; unless he should take it into his head to go on to Bamble to see
Farmer Helmboe."

"And his daughter Siegfrid."

"Yes. Siegfrid, my best friend, whom I love like a sister!" replied
the young girl, smiling.

"All, well, Hulda, shut up the house, and let's go to bed."

"You are not ill, are you, mother?"

"No; but I want to be up bright and early to-morrow morning. I must go
to Moel."

"What for?"

"Why, we must be laying in our stock of provisions for the coming
summer, and--"

"And I suppose the agent from Christiania has come down with his wagon
of wines and provisions."

"Yes; Lengling, the foreman at the saw-mill, met him this afternoon,
and informed me of the fact as he passed. We have very little left in
the way of ham and smoked salmon, and I don't want to run any risk of
being caught with an empty larder. Tourists are likely to begin their
excursions to the Telemark almost any day now; especially, if the
weather should become settled, and our establishment must be in a
condition to receive them. Do you realize that this is the fifteenth
of April?"

"The fifteenth of April!" repeated the young girl, thoughtfully.

"Yes, so to-morrow I must attend to these matters," continued Dame
Hansen. "I can make all my purchases in two hours, and I will return
with Joel in the kariol."

"In case you should meet the postman, don't forget to ask him if there
is a letter for us--"

"And especially for you. That is quite likely, for it is a month since
you heard from Ole."

"Yes, a month--a whole month."

"Still, you should not worry, child. The delay is not at all
surprising. Besides, if the Moel postman has nothing for you, that
which didn't come by the way of Christiania may come by the way of
Bergen, may it not?"

"Yes, mother," replied Hulda. "But how can I help worrying, when I
think how far it is from here to the Newfoundland fishing banks. The
whole broad Atlantic to cross, while the weather continues so bad. It
is almost a year since my poor Ole left me, and who can say when we
shall see him again in Dal?"

"And whether we shall be here when he returns," sighed Dame Hansen,
but so softly that her daughter did not hear the words.

Hulda went to close the front door of the inn which stood on the
Vesfjorddal road; but she did not take the trouble to turn the key in
the lock. In hospitable Norway, such precautions are unnecessary. It
is customary for travelers to enter these country inns either by
night or by day without calling any one to open the door; and even
the loneliest habitations are safe from the depredations of thieves
or assassins, for no criminal attempts against life or property ever
disturb the peace of this primitive land.

The mother and daughter occupied two front rooms on the second story
of the inn--two neat and airy, though plainly furnished rooms. Above
them, directly under the sloping roof, was Joel's chamber, lighted by
a window incased in a tastefully carved frame-work of pine.

From this window, the eye, after roaming over the grand mountain
horizon, returned with delight to the narrow valley through which
flowed the Maan, which is half river, half torrent.

A wooden staircase, with heavy balusters and highly polished steps,
led from the lower hall to the floors above, and nothing could be more
neat and attractive than the whole aspect of this establishment, in
which the travelers found a comfort that is rare in Norwegian inns.

Hulda and her mother were in the habit of retiring early when they
were alone, and Dame Hansen had already lighted her candle, and was
on her way upstairs, when a loud knocking at the door made them both
start.

"Dame Hansen! Dame Hansen!" cried a voice.

Dame Hansen paused on the stairs.

"Who can have come so late?" she exclaimed.

"Can it be that Joel has met with an accident?" returned Hulda,
quickly.

And she hastened toward the door.

She found a lad there--one of the young rascals known as _skydskarls_,
that make a living by clinging to the back of kariols, and taking the
horse back when the journey is ended.

"What do you want here at this hour?" asked Hulda.

"First of all to bid you good-evening," replied the boy,
mischievously.

"Is that all?"

"No; that isn't all; but a boy oughtn't to forget his manners, ought
he?"

"You are right. But who sent you?"

"Your brother Joel."

"And what for?" asked Dame Hansen, advancing to the door with the
slow and measured tread that is a characteristic of the inhabitants of
Norway. There is quicksilver in the veins of their soil, but little or
none in the veins of their bodies.

The reply had evidently caused the mother some anxiety, however, for
she added hastily:

"Has anything happened to my son?"

"No, but the Christiania postman gave him a letter, and--"

"A letter from Drammen?" repeated Dame Hansen, in a lower tone.

"I don't know about that," replied the youth. "All I do know is, that
Joel can't get home before to-morrow, and he sent me here to deliver
the letter."

"It is important then?"

"I should judge so."

"Hand it here," said Dame Hansen, in a tone that betrayed keen
anxiety.

"Here it is, clean and not wrinkled in the least. But the letter is
not for you."

Dame Hansen seemed to breathe more freely.

"Then who is it for?" she asked.

"For your daughter."

"For me!" cried Hulda. "It is a letter from Ole! I am sure it is--a
letter that came by way of Christiania. My brother did not want me to
be kept waiting."

Hulda had snatched the letter from the boy's hand, and now taking
it to the table upon which her mother had deposited the candle, she
examined the address.

"Yes, it is from him. It is certainly from him! Heaven grant that he
writes to announce the speedy return of the 'Viking'!"

"Won't you come in?" said Dame Hansen, turning to the boy.

"Only for a minute. I must get back home to-night, for I am to go with
a kariol to-morrow morning."

"Very well. Tell Joel, from me, that I expect to go to Moel to-morrow,
and that he must wait for me there."

"To-morrow evening?"

"No; to-morrow morning, and he must not leave Moel until he sees me.
We will return to Dal together."

"Very well, Dame Hansen."

"Won't you take a drop of _brandevin_?"

"With pleasure."

The boy approached the table, and Dame Hansen handed him a glass of
the beverage which is such a powerful protection against the evening
fogs. It is needless to say that he drained the glass, then,

"_God-aften!_" he said.

"_God-aften_, my son!"

This is the Norwegian good-night. It was simply spoken, without even
an inclination of the head, and the lad instantly departed, without
seeming to mind in the least the long walk that he had before him. The
sound of his footsteps soon died away beneath the trees that border
the swiftly flowing river.

Hulda still stood gazing at Ole's letter. Think of it! This frail
envelope must have crossed the broad ocean to reach her, the broad
ocean in which the rivers of western Norway lose themselves. She
examined the different postmarks. Though mailed on the 15th of March,
the missive had not reached Dal until the 15th of April. Why! a month
had already elapsed since the letter was written! How many things
might have happened in a month on the shores of Newfoundland! Was it
not still winter, the dangerous season of equinoxes? Are not these
fishing banks the most dangerous in the world, swept by terrible gales
from the North Pole? A perilous and arduous vocation was this business
of fishing which Ole followed! And if he followed it was it not that
she, his betrothed, whom he was to marry on his return, might reap the
benefits?

Poor Ole! What did he say in this letter? Doubtless that he loved
Hulda as faithfully and truly as Hulda loved him, that they were
united in thought, in spite of the distance that separated them, and
that he longed for the day of his return to Dal.

Yes, he said all this, Hulda was sure of it. But perhaps he might add
that the day of his return was near at hand--that the fishing cruise
which had enticed the inhabitants of Bergen so far from their native
land, was nearly at an end. Perhaps Ole would tell her that the
"Viking" had finished taking aboard her cargo, that she was about
to sail, and that the last days of April would not pass without a
blissful meeting in the pleasant home at Vesfjorddal. Perhaps, too, he
would assure her, at last, that she might safely appoint the day for
the pastor to come to Moel to unite them in the little chapel whose
steeple rose from a small grove not a hundred yards from Dame Hansen's
inn.

To learn all this, it might only be necessary to break the seal, draw
out Ole's letter, and read it, through the tears of joy or sorrow that
its contents would be sure to bring to Hulda's eyes, and doubtless
more than one impatient girl of the south, or even of Denmark or
Holland, would already have known all! But Hulda was in a sort of a
dream, and dreams terminate only when God chooses to end them, and how
often one regrets them, so bitter is the reality.

"Is it really a letter from Ole that your brother has sent you, my
daughter?" inquired Dame Hansen.

"Yes; I recognize the handwriting."

"Well, are you going to wait until to-morrow to read it?"

Hulda took one more look at the envelope, then, after slowly breaking
the seal, she drew out the carefully written letter, which read as
follows:

    "Saint-Pierre-Miquelon, March 17th, 1862.

    "My Dearest Hulda,--You will hear, with pleasure, that our
    fishing venture has prospered, and that it will be concluded
    in a few days. Yes; we are nearing the end of the season, and
    after a year's absence how glad I shall be to return to Dal
    and find myself in the midst of the only friends I have in the
    world--yours and mine.

    "My share in the profits of the expedition amounts to quite
    a handsome sum, which will start us in housekeeping. Messrs.
    Help Bros., the owners of the ship, have been informed that
    the 'Viking' will probably return by the 15th or 20th of May;
    so you may expect to see me at that time; that is to say, in a
    few weeks at the very longest.

    "My dear Hulda, I trust to find you looking even prettier
    than at my departure, and in the best of health, you and your
    mother as well, also that hardy, brave comrade, my cousin
    Joel, your brother, who asks nothing better than to become
    mine.

    "On receipt of this, give my very best respects to Dame
    Hansen--I can see her now, sitting in her wooden arm-chair by
    the old stove in the big hall--and tell her I love her with a
    twofold love, for she is my aunt as well as your mother.

    "Above all, don't take the trouble to come to Bergen to meet
    me, for it is quite possible that the 'Viking' will arrive at
    an earlier date than I have mentioned. However that may be, my
    dear Hulda can count upon seeing me at Dal twenty-four hours
    after we land. Don't be too much surprised if I should arrive
    considerably ahead of time.

    "We have had a pretty rough time of it, this past winter, the
    weather having been more severe than any our fishermen have
    ever encountered; but fortunately fish have been plenty.
    The 'Viking' brings back nearly five thousand quintals,
    deliverable at Bergen, and already sold by the efforts of Help
    Bros. And last, but not least, we have succeeded in selling
    at a handsome profit, and I, who have a share in the venture,
    will realize something quite handsome from it.

    "Besides, even if I should not bring a small competence home
    with me, I have an idea, or rather, I have a presentiment that
    it is awaiting me on my return. Yes; comparative wealth, to
    say nothing of happiness! In what way? That is my secret, my
    dearest Hulda, and you will forgive me for having a secret
    from you! It is the only one! Besides, I will tell you all
    about it. When? Well, as soon as an opportunity offers--before
    our marriage, if it should be delayed by some unforeseen
    misfortune--afterward, if I return at the appointed time, and
    you become my wife within a week after my arrival, as I trust
    you will.

    "A hundred fond kisses, my darling Hulda. Kiss Dame Hansen,
    and Joel, too, for me. In fancy, I imprint another kiss upon
    your brow, around which the shining crown of the brides of
    the Telemark will cast a saint-like halo. Once more, farewell,
    dearest Hulda, farewell!

    "Your devoted lover,

    "OLE KAMP."




CHAPTER II.


Dal is a modest hamlet consisting of but a few houses; some on
either side of a road that is little more than a bridle-path, others
scattered over the surrounding hills. But they all face the narrow
valley of Vesfjorddal, with their backs to the line of hills to the
north, at the base of which flows the Maan.

A little church erected in 1855, whose chancel is pierced by two
narrow stained-glass windows, lifts its square belfry from out a leafy
grove hard by. Here and there rustic bridges cross the rivulets that
dance merrily along toward the river. In the distance are two or three
primitive saw-mills, run by water-power, with a wheel to move the
saw, as well as a wheel to move the beam or the tree; and seen from a
little distance, the chapel, saw-mills, houses, and cabins, all seem
to be enveloped in a soft olive haze that emanates from the dark-green
firs and the paler birches which either singly or in groups extend
from the winding banks of the Maan to the crests of the lofty
mountains.

Such is the fresh and laughing hamlet of Dal, with its picturesque
dwellings, painted, some of them, in delicate green or pale pink
tints, others in such glaring colors as bright yellow and blood-red.
The roofs of birch bark, covered with turf, which is mown in the
autumn, are crowned with natural flowers. All this is indescribably
charming, and eminently characteristic of the most picturesque country
in the world. In short, Dal is in the Telemark, the Telemark is in
Norway, and Norway is in Switzerland, with thousands of fiords that
permit the sea to kiss the feet of its mountains.

The Telemark composes the broad portion of the immense horn that
Norway forms between Bergen and Christiania.

This dependency of the prefecture of Batsberg, has the mountains and
glaciers of Switzerland, but it is not Switzerland. It has gigantic
water-falls like North America, but it is not America. The landscape
is adorned with picturesque cottages, and processions of inhabitants,
clad in costumes of a former age, like Holland, but it is not Holland.
The Telemark is far better than any or all of these; it is the
Telemark, noted above all countries in the world for the beauty of
its scenery. The writer has had the pleasure of visiting it. He has
explored it thoroughly, in a kariol with relays of post-horses--when
he could get them--and he brought back with him such a vivid
recollection of its manifold charms that he would be glad to convey
some idea of it to the reader of this simple narrative.

At the date of this story, 1862, Norway was not yet traversed by the
railroad that now enables one to go from Stockholm to Drontheim, by
way of Christiania. Now, an extensive network of iron rails extends
entirely across these two Scandinavian countries, which are so averse
to a united existence. But imprisoned in a railroad-carriage, the
traveler, though he makes much more rapid progress than in a kariol,
misses all the originality that formerly pervaded the routes of
travel. He misses the journey through Southern Sweden on the curious
Gotha Canal, in which the steamboats, by rising from lock to lock,
manage to reach an elevation of three hundred feet. Nor does he have
an opportunity to visit the falls of Trolletann, nor Drammen, nor
Kongsberg, nor any of the beauties of the Telemark.

In those days the railroad existed only upon paper. Twenty years were
to elapse before one could traverse the Scandinavian kingdom from
one shore to the other in forty hours, and visit the North Cape on
excursion tickets to Spitzberg.

In those days Dal was, and may it long remain, the central point
for foreign or native tourists, these last being for the most part
students from Christiania. From Dal they could wander over the entire
Telemark and Hardanger region, explore the valley of Vesfjorddal
between Lakes Mjos and Tinn, and visit the wonderful cataracts of the
Rjukan Tun. The hamlet boasts of but one inn, but that is certainly
the most attractive and comfortable imaginable, and one of the
most important also, for it can offer four bed-chambers for the
accommodation of its guests. In a word, it is Dame Hansen's inn.

A few benches surround the base of its pink walls, which are separated
from the ground by a substantial granite foundation. The spruce
rafters and weather-boarding have acquired such hardness and toughness
with age that the sharpest hatchet can make little or no impression
upon them. Between the roughly hewn rafters, which are placed
horizontally one above the other, a mixture of clay and turf forms
a stanch roof, through which the hardest winter rains can not force
their way.

Upstairs, in the bedrooms, the ceilings are painted in dark red or
black tints to contrast with the more cheerful and delicate hues of
the wood-work.

In one corner of the large hall stands a huge cylinder stove, the
pipe of which rises nearly to the ceiling, before it disappears in the
kitchen chimney. In another corner stands a tall clock which emits
a sonorous tick-tack, as its carved hands travel slowly around its
enameled face. Here is a secretary, black with age, side by side
with a massive iron tripod. Upon the mantel is an immense terra-cotta
candlestick which can be transformed into a three-branched candelabrum
by turning it upside down. The handsomest furniture in the house
adorns this spacious hall--the birch-root table, with its spreading
feet, the big chest with its richly wrought brass handles, in which
the Sunday and holiday clothing is kept, the tall arm-chair, hard
and uncomfortable as a church-pew, the painted wooden chairs, and
the spinning-wheel striped with green, to contrast with the scarlet
petticoat of the spinner.

Yonder stands the pot in which the butter is kept, and the paddle with
which it is worked, and here is the tobacco-box, and the grater of
elaborately carved bone.

And, finally, over the door which opens into the kitchen is a large
dresser, with long rows of brass and copper cooking-utensils and
bright-colored dishes, the little grindstone for sharpening knives,
half-buried in its varnished case, and the egg-dish, old enough to
serve as a chalice.

And how wonderful and amusing are the walls, hung with linen
tapestries representing scenes from the Bible, and brilliant with all
the gorgeous coloring of the pictures of Epinal.

As for the guests' rooms, though they are less pretentious, they are
no less comfortable, with their spotless neatness, their curtains of
hanging-vines that droop from the turf-covered roof, their huge beds,
sheeted with snowy and fragrant linen, and their hangings with verses
from the Old Testament, embroidered in yellow upon a red ground.

Nor must we forget that the floor of the main hall, and the floors of
all the rooms, both upstairs and down, are strewn with little twigs
of birch, pine, and juniper, whose leaves fill the house with their
healthful and exhilarating odor.

Can one imagine a more charming _posada_ in Italy, or a more seductive
_fonda_ in Spain? No. And the crowd of English tourists have not yet
raised the scale of prices as in Switzerland--at least, they had not
at the time of which I write. In Dal, the current coin is not the
pound sterling, the sovereign of which the travelers' purse is
soon emptied. It is a silver coin, worth about five francs, and its
subdivisions are the mark, equal in value to about a franc, and the
skilling, which must not be confounded with the English shilling, as
it is only equivalent to a French _sou_.

Nor will the tourist have any opportunity to use or abuse the
pretentious bank-note in the Telemark. One-mark notes are white;
five-mark notes are blue; ten-mark notes are yellow; fifty-mark notes,
green; one hundred mark notes, red. Two more, and we should have all
the colors of the rainbow.

Besides--and this is a point of very considerable importance--the
food one obtains at the Dal inn is excellent; a very unusual thing
at houses of public entertainment in this locality, for the Telemark
deserves only too well its surname of the Buttermilk Country. At
Tiness, Listhus, Tinoset, and many other places, no bread is to be
had, or if there be, it is of such poor quality as to be uneatable.
One finds there only an oaten cake, known as _flat brod_, dry, black,
and hard as pasteboard, or a coarse loaf composed of a mixture of
birch-bark, lichens, and chopped straw. Eggs are a luxury, and a most
stale and unprofitable one; but there is any quantity of poor beer to
be had, a profusion of buttermilk, either sweet or sour, and sometimes
a little coffee, so thick and muddy that it is much more like
distilled soot than the products of Mocha or Rio Nunez.

In Dame Hansen's establishment, on the contrary, cellar and larder
were alike well-stored. What more could the most exacting tourist
ask than salmon, either salt or smoked--fresh salmon that have never
tasted tainted waters, fish from the pure streams of the Telemark,
fowls, neither too fat nor too lean, eggs in every style, crisp
oaten and barley cakes, fruits, more especially strawberries,
bread--unleavened bread, it is here, but of the very best
quality--beer, and some old bottles of that Saint Julien that have
spread the fame of French vineyards even to this distant land?

And this being the case, it is not strange that the inn at Dal is well
and favorably known in all the countries of Northern Europe.

One can see this, too, by glancing over the register in which many
travelers have not only recorded their names, but paid glowing
tributes to Dame Hansen's merits as an inn-keeper. The names are
principally those of Swedes and Norwegians from every part of
Scandinavia; but the English make a very respectable showing; and one
of them, who had waited at least an hour for the summit of Gousta to
emerge from the morning mist that enveloped it, wrote upon one of the
pages:

    "Patientia omnia vincit?"




CHAPTER III.


Without being very deeply versed in ethnography, one may be strongly
inclined to believe, in common with many _savants_, that a close
relationship exists between the leading families of the English
aristocracy and the oldest families of Scandinavia. Numerous proofs
of this fact, indeed, are to be found in the ancestral names which
are identical in both countries. There is no aristocracy in Norway,
however; still, though the democracy everywhere rules, that does not
prevent it from being aristocratic to the highest degree. All are
equals upon an exalted plane instead of a low one. Even in the
humblest hut may be found a genealogical tree which has not
degenerated in the least because it has sprung up anew in humble soil;
and the walls are adorned with the proud blazons of the feudal lords
from whom these plain peasants are descended.

So it was with the Hansens of Dal, who were unquestionably related,
though rather remotely, to the English peers created after Rollo's
invasion of Normandy, and though rank and wealth had both departed
they had at least preserved the old pride, or rather dignity, which
becomes all social ranks.

It was a matter of very little consequence, however. Whether he had
ancestors of lofty lineage or not, Harald Hansen was simply a village
inn-keeper. The house had come down to him from his father and from
his grandfather, who were widely known and respected, and after
his death his widow continued the business in a way that elicited
universal commendation.

Whether or not Harald had made a fortune in the business, no one
was able to say; but he had been able to rear his son Joel and his
daughter Hulda in comfort; and Ole Kamp, a son of his wife's sister,
had also been brought up like one of his own children. But for his
uncle Harald, this orphan child would doubtless have been one of those
poor creatures who come into the world only to leave it; and Ole
Kamp evinced a truly filial devotion toward his parents by adoption.
Nothing would ever sever the tie that bound him to the Hansen family,
to which his marriage with Hulda was about to bind him still more
closely.

Harald Hansen had died about eighteen months before, leaving his
wife, in addition to the inn, a small farm on the mountain, a piece
of property which yielded very meager returns, if any. This was
especially true of late, for the seasons had been remarkably
unpropitious, and agriculture of every kind had suffered greatly,
even the pastures. There had been many of those "iron nights," as the
Norwegian peasants call them--nights of north-easterly gales and ice
that kill the corn down to the very root--and that meant ruin to the
farmers of the Telemark and the Hardanger.

Still, whatever Dame Hansen might think of the situation of affairs,
she had never said a word to any living soul, not even to her
children. Naturally cold and reserved, she was very uncommunicative--a
fact that pained Hulda and Joel not a little. But with that respect
for the head of the family innate in Northern lands, they made no
attempt to break down a reserve which was eminently distasteful to
them. Besides, Dame Hansen never asked aid or counsel, being firmly
convinced of the infallibility of her own judgment, for she was a true
Norwegian in that respect.

Dame Hansen was now about fifty years old. Advancing age had not bowed
her tall form, though it had whitened her hair; nor had it dimmed the
brightness of her dark-blue eyes, whose azure was reflected in the
clear orbs of her daughter; but her complexion had taken on the yellow
hue of old parchment, and a few wrinkles were beginning to furrow her
forehead.

The madame, as they say in Scandinavia, was invariably attired in a
full black skirt, for she had never laid aside her mourning since her
husband's death. Below the shoulder-straps of a brown bodice appeared
the long full sleeves of an unbleached cotton chemise. On her
shoulders she wore a small dark-colored fichu that crossed upon her
breast, which was also covered by the large bib of her apron. She
always wore as a head-dress a close-fitting black-silk cap that
covered almost her entire head, and tied behind, a kind of head-dress
that is rarely seen nowadays.

Seated stiffly erect in her wooden arm-chair, the grave hostess
neglected her spinning-wheel only to enjoy a small birchwood pipe,
whose smoke enveloped her in a faint cloud.

Really, the house would have seemed very gloomy had it not been for
the presence of the two children.

A worthy lad was Joel Hansen. Twenty-five years of age, well built,
tall, like all Norwegian mountaineers, proud in bearing, though not
in the least boastful or conceited. He had fine hair, verging upon
chestnut, with blue eyes so dark as to seem almost black. His garb
displayed to admirable advantage his powerful shoulders, his broad
chest, in which his lungs had full play, and stalwart limbs which
never failed him even in the most difficult mountain ascents. His
dark-blue jacket, fitting tightly at the waist, was adorned on the
shoulders with epaulets, and in the back with designs in colored
embroidery similar to those that embellish the vests of the Breton
peasantry. His yellow breeches were fastened at the knee by large
buckles. Upon his head he wore a broad-brimmed brown hat with a
red-and-black band, and his legs were usually incased either in coarse
cloth gaiters or in long stout boots without heels.

His vocation was that of a mountain guide in the district of the
Telemark, and even in the Hardanger. Always ready to start, and
untiring in his exertions, he was a worthy descendant of the Norwegian
hero Rollo, the walker, celebrated in the legends of that country.
Between times he accompanied English sportsmen who repair to that
region to shoot the riper, a species of ptarmigan, larger than that
found in the Hebrides, and the jerpir, a partridge much more delicate
in its flavor than the grouse of Scotland. When winter came, the
hunting of wolves engrossed his attention, for at that season of the
year these fierce animals, emboldened by hunger, not unfrequently
venture out upon the surface of the frozen lake. Then there was bear
hunting in summer, when that animal, accompanied by her young, comes
to secure its feast of fresh grass, and when one must pursue it over
plateaus at an altitude of from ten to twelve thousand feet. More than
once Joel had owed his life solely to the great strength that enabled
him to endure the embraces of these formidable animals, and to the
imperturbable coolness which enabled him to eventually dispatch them.

But when there was neither tourist nor hunter to be guided through the
valley of the Vesfjorddal, Joel devoted his attention to the _soetur_,
the little mountain farm where a young shepherd kept guard over half
a dozen cows and about thirty sheep--a _soetur_ consisting exclusively
of pasture land.

Joel, being naturally very pleasant and obliging, was known and loved
in every village in the Telemark; but two persons for whom he felt a
boundless affection were his cousin Ole and his sister Hulda.

When Ole Kamp left Dal to embark for the last time, how deeply Joel
regretted his inability to dower Hulda and thus avert the necessity
for her lover's departure! In fact, if he had been accustomed to the
sea, he would certainly have gone in his cousin's place. But money was
needed to start them in housekeeping, and as Dame Hansen had offered
no assistance, Joel understood only too well that she did not feel
inclined to devote any portion of the estate to that purpose, so there
was nothing for Ole to do but cross the broad Atlantic.

Joel had accompanied him to the extreme end of the valley on his way
to Bergen, and there, after a long embrace, he wished him a pleasant
journey and a speedy return, and then returned to console his sister,
whom he loved with an affection which was at the same time fraternal
and paternal in its character.

Hulda at that time was exactly eighteen years of age. She was not the
_piga_, as the servant in a Norwegian inn is called, but rather the
_froken_, the young lady of the house, as her mother was the madame.
What a charming face was hers, framed in a wealth of pale golden hair,
under a thin linen cap projecting in the back to give room for the
long plaits of hair! What a lovely form incased in this tightly
fitting bodice of red stuff, ornamented with green shoulder-straps and
surmounted by a snowy chemisette, the sleeves of which were fastened
at the wrist by a ribbon bracelet! What grace and perfect symmetry
in the waist, encircled by a red belt with clasps of silver filigree
which held in place the dark-green skirt, below which appeared the
white stocking protected by the dainty pointed toed shoe of the
Telemark!

Yes, Ole's betrothed was certainly charming, with the slightly
melancholy expression of the daughters of the North softening her
smiling face; and on seeing her one instantly thought of Hulda the
Fair, whose name she bore, and who figures as the household fairy in
Scandinavian mythology.

Nor did the reserve of a chaste and modest maiden mar the grace with
which she welcomed the guests who came to the inn. She was well
known to the world of tourists; and it was not one of the smallest
attractions of the inn to be greeted by that cordial shake of the
hand that Hulda bestowed on one and all. And after having said to her,
"_Tack for mad_" (Thanks for the meal), what could be more delightful
than to hear her reply in her fresh sonorous voice: "_Wed bekomme_!"
(May it do you good!)




CHAPTER IV.


Ole Kamp had been absent a year; and as he said in his letter, his
winter's experience on the fishing banks of Newfoundland had been
a severe one. When one makes money there one richly earns it. The
equinoctial storms that rage there not unfrequently destroy a whole
fishing fleet in a few hours; but fish abound, and vessels which
escape find ample compensation for the toil and dangers of this home
of the tempest.

Besides, Norwegians are excellent seamen, and shrink from no danger.
In the numberless fiords that extend from Christiansand to Cape North,
among the dangerous reefs of Finland, and in the channels of the
Loffoden Islands, opportunities to familiarize themselves with the
perils of ocean are not wanting; and from time immemorial they have
given abundant proofs of their courage. Their ancestors were intrepid
mariners at an epoch when the Hanse monopolized the commerce of
northern Europe. Possibly they were a trifle prone to indulge in
piracy in days gone by, but piracy was then quite common. Doubtless
commerce has reformed since then, though one may perhaps be pardoned
for thinking that there is still room for improvement.

However that may be, the Norwegians were certainly fearless seamen;
they are to-day, and so they will ever be. Ole Kamp was not the man to
belie his origin; besides, he had served his apprenticeship under his
father, who was the master of a Bergen coasting vessel. His childhood
had been spent in that port, which is one of the most frequented in
Scandinavia. Before he ventured out upon the open sea he had been an
untiring fisher in the fiords, and a fearless robber of the sea-birds'
nests, and when he became old enough to serve as cabin-boy he made a
voyage across the North Sea and even to the waters of the Polar Ocean.

Soon afterward his father died, and as he had lost his mother several
years before, his uncle Harald Hansen invited him to become a member
of his family, which he did, though he continued to follow the same
calling.

In the intervals between his voyages he invariably spent his time with
the friends he loved; but he made regular voyages upon large fishing
vessels, and rose to the rank of mate when he was but twenty-one. He
was now twenty-three years of age.

When he visited Dal, Joel found him a most congenial companion. He
accompanied him on his excursions to the mountains, and across the
highest table-lands of the Telemark. The young sailor seemed as much
at home in the fields as in the fiords, and never lagged behind unless
it was to keep his cousin Hulda company.

A close friendship gradually sprung up between Joel and Ole, and quite
naturally the same sentiment assumed a different form in respect to
the young girl. Joel, of course, encouraged it. Where would his sister
ever find a better fellow, a more sympathetic nature, a warmer and
more devoted heart? With Ole for a husband, Hulda's happiness was
assured. So it was with the entire approval of her mother and brother
that the young girl followed the natural promptings of her heart.
Though these people of the North are undemonstrative, they must not
be accused of a want of sensibility. No! It is only their way; and
perhaps their way is as good as any other, after all.

So it came to pass that one day, when all four of them were sitting
quietly together, Ole remarked, without any preamble whatever:

"An idea occurs to me, Hulda."

"What is it?"

"It seems to me that we ought to marry."

"I think so too."

"And so do I," added Dame Hansen as coolly as if the matter had been
under discussion for some time.

"I agree with you," remarked Joel, "and in that case I shall naturally
become your brother-in-law."

"Yes," said Ole; "but it is probable that I shall only love you the
better for it."

"That is very possible."

"We have your consent, then?"

"Upon my word! nothing would please me better," replied Joel.

"So it is decided, Hulda?" inquired Dame Hansen.

"Yes, mother," replied the girl, quietly.

"You are really willing?" asked Ole. "I have loved you a long time,
Hulda, without saying so."

"And I you, Ole."

"How it came about, I really do not know."

"Nor I."

"But it was doubtless seeing you grow more beautiful and good day by
day."

"That is saying a little too much, my dear Ole."

"No; I certainly ought to be able to say that without making you
blush, for it is only the truth. Didn't you see that I was beginning
to love Hulda, Dame Hansen?"

"I suspected as much."

"And you, Joel?"

"I was sure of it."

"Then I certainly think that you ought to have warned me," said Ole,
smiling.

"But how about your voyages, Ole?" inquired Dame Hansen. "Won't they
seem intolerable to you after you are married?"

"So intolerable that I shall not follow the sea any more after my
marriage."

"You will not go to sea any more?"

"No, Hulda. Do you think it would be possible for me to leave you for
months at a time?"

"So this is to be your last voyage?"

"Yes, and if we have tolerable luck, this voyage will yield me quite
a snug little sum of money, for Help Bros. have promised me a share in
the profits."

"They are good men," remarked Joel.

"The best men living," replied Ole, "and well known and highly
respected by all the sailors of Bergen."

"But what do you expect to do after you cease to follow the sea, my
dear Ole?" inquired Hulda.

"I shall go into partnership with Joel in his business, I have pretty
good legs, and if they are not good enough, I will improve them by
going into regular training. Besides, I have thought of a plan which
will not prove a bad one perhaps. Why can't we establish a messenger
service between Drammen, Kongsberg and a few other towns in the
Telemark? Communication now is neither easy nor regular, and there
might be money in the scheme. Besides, I have other plans, to say
nothing of--"

"Of what?"

"Never mind, now. I will tell you on my return. But I warn you that I
am firmly resolved to make my Hulda the happiest woman in the country.
Yes, I am."

"If you but knew how easy that will be!" replied Hulda, offering him
her hand. "Am I not that already, and is there a home in all Dal as
pleasant as ours?"

Dame Hansen hastily averted her head.

"So the matter is settled?" asked Ole, cheerfully.

"Yes," replied Joel.

"And settled beyond recall?"

"Certainly."

"And you feel no regret, Hulda?"

"None whatever, my dear Ole."

"I think, however, that it would be better not to appoint the day for
your marriage until after your return," remarked Joel.

"Very well, but it will go hard with me if I do not return in less
than a year to lead Hulda to the church at Moel, where our friend,
Pastor Andersen, will not refuse to make his best prayer for us!"

And it was in this way that the marriage of Hulda Hansen and Ole Kamp
had been decided upon.

The young sailor was to go aboard his vessel a week later; but before
they parted the lovers were formally betrothed in accordance with the
touching custom of Scandinavian countries.

In simple and honest Norway lovers are almost invariably publicly
betrothed before marriage. Sometimes the marriage is not solemnized
until two or three years afterward, but one must not suppose that the
betrothal is simply an interchange of vows which depend only upon the
honesty of the parties interested. No, the obligation is much more
sacred, and even if this act of betrothal is not binding in the eyes
of the law, it is, at least, so regarded by that universal law called
custom.

So, in this case, it was necessary to make arrangements for a ceremony
over which Pastor Andersen should preside. There was no minister in
Dal, nor in any of the neighboring hamlets. In Norway they have what
they call Sunday towns, in which the minister resides, and where the
leading families of the parish assemble for worship. They even lease
apartments there, in which they take up their abode for twenty-four
hours or more--time to perform their religious duties--and people
return from the town as from a pilgrimage.

Dal, it is true, boasted of a chapel, but the pastor came only when he
was summoned.

After all, Moel was not far off, only about eight miles distant, at
the end of Lake Tinn, and Pastor Andersen was a very obliging man,
and a good walker; so the worthy minister was invited to attend the
betrothal in the twofold capacity of minister and family friend. The
acquaintance was one of long standing. He had seen Joel and Hulda grow
up, and loved them as well as he loved that young sea-dog, Ole Kamp,
so the news of the intended marriage was very pleasing to him.

So Pastor Andersen gathered together his robe, his collar, and his
prayer-book, and started off for Dal one misty, moisty morning. He
arrived there in the company of Joel, who had gone half-way to meet
him, and it is needless to say that his coming was hailed with delight
at Dame Hansen's inn, that he had the very best room in the house, and
that the floor was freshly strewn with twigs of juniper that perfumed
it like a chapel.

At one o'clock on the following day the little church was thrown
open, and there, in the presence of the pastor and a few friends and
neighbors, Ole and Hulda solemnly promised to wed each other when the
young sailor should return from the last voyage he intended to make.
A year is a long time to wait, but it passes all the same, nor is it
intolerable when two persons can trust each other.

And now Ole could not, without good cause, forsake her to whom he had
plighted his troth, nor could Hulda retract the promise she had given
to Ole; and if Ole had not left Norway a few days after the betrothal,
he might have profited by the incontestable right it gave him to visit
the young girl whenever he pleased, to write to her whenever he chose,
walk out with her arm in arm, unaccompanied by any member of the
family, and enjoy a preference over all others in the dances that form
a part of all fêtes and ceremonies.

But Ole Kamp had been obliged to return to Bergen, and one week
afterward the "Viking" set sail for the fishing banks of Newfoundland,
and Hulda could only look forward to the letters which her betrothed
had promised to send her by every mail.

And these impatiently expected letters never failed her, and always
brought a ray of happiness to the house which seemed so gloomy
after the departure of one of its inmates. The voyage was safely
accomplished; the fishing proved excellent, and the profits promised
to be large. Besides, at the end of each letter, Ole always referred
to a certain secret, and of the fortune it was sure to bring him. It
was a secret that Hulda would have been glad to know, and Dame Hansen,
too, for reasons one would not have been likely to suspect.

Dame Hansen seemed to have become even more gloomy and anxious and
reticent than ever, and a circumstance which she did not see fit to
mention to her children increased her anxiety very considerably.

Three days after the arrival of Ole's last letter, as Dame Hansen
was returning alone from the saw-mill, to which place she had gone to
order a bag of shavings from the foreman, Lengling, she was accosted
near her own door by a man who was a stranger in that part of the
country.

"This is Dame Hansen, is it not?" he inquired.

"Yes; but I do not know you," was the reply.

"That doesn't matter," rejoined the man. "I arrived here only this
morning from Drammen, and am now on my way back."

"From Drammen?" repeated Dame Hansen, quickly.

"You are acquainted, I think, with a certain Monsieur Sandgoist, who
lives there?"

"Monsieur Sandgoist!" repeated Dame Hansen, whose face paled at the
name. "Yes, I know him."

"Ah, well! When Monsieur Sandgoist heard that I was coming to Dal, he
asked me to give his respects to you."

"Was that all?"

"And to say to you that it was more than probable that he would pay
you a visit next month. Good health to you, and good-evening, Dame
Hansen."




CHAPTER V.


Hulda was considerably surprised at the persistency with which Ole
alluded in his letters to the fortune that was to be his on his
return. Upon what did the young man base his expectations? Hulda could
not imagine, and she was very anxious to know. Was this anxiety due
solely to an idle curiosity on her part? By no means, for the secret
certainly affected her deeply. Not that she was ambitious, this modest
and honest young girl; nor did she in looking forward to the future
ever aspire to what we call wealth. Ole's affection satisfied, and
would always satisfy her. If wealth came, she would welcome it with
joy. If it did not come, she would still be content.

This is precisely what Hulda and Joel said to each other the day
after Ole's last letter reached Dal. They agreed perfectly upon this
subject, as upon all others, by the way. And then Joel added:

"No; it is impossible, little sister. You certainly must be keeping
something from me."

"Keeping something from you!"

"Yes; for I can not believe that Ole went away without giving you some
clew to his secret."

"Did he say anything to you about it?"

"No; but you and I are not one and the same person."

"Yes, we are, brother."

"I am not Ole's betrothed, at all events."

"Almost," said the young girl; "and if any misfortune should befall
him, and he should not return from this voyage, you would be as
inconsolable as I would be, and your tears would flow quite as freely
as mine."

"Really, little sister. I forbid you to even speak of such a thing,"
replied Joel. "Ole not return from his last voyage to the great
fishing banks! What can have put such an idea into your head? You
surely can not mean what you say, Hulda!"

"No, certainly not. And yet, I do not know. I can not drive away
certain presentiments--the result, perhaps, of bad dreams."

"Dreams are only dreams."

"True, brother, but where do they come from?"

"From ourselves, not from heaven. You are anxious, and so your fears
haunt you in your slumber. Besides, it is almost always so when one
has earnestly desired a thing and the time when one's desires are to
be realized is approaching."

"I know it, Joel."

"Really, I thought you were much more sensible, little sister. Yes,
and more energetic. Here you have just received a letter from Joel
saying that the 'Viking' will return before the end of the month, and
it is now the 19th of April, and consequently none too soon for you to
begin your preparations for the wedding."

"Do you really think so, Joel?"

"Certainly I think so, Hulda. I even think that we have delayed too
long already. Think of it. We must have a wedding that will not only
create a sensation in Dal, but in all the neighboring villages. I
intend it shall be the grandest one ever known in the district, so I
am going to set to work immediately."

An affair of this kind is always a momentous occasion in all the
country districts of Norway, particularly in the Telemark, so that
every day Joel had a conversation with his mother on the subject. It
was only a few moments after Dame Hansen's meeting with the stranger,
whose message had so deeply agitated her, and though she had seated
herself at her spinning-wheel as usual, it would have been plain to a
close observer that her thoughts were far away.

Even Joel noticed that his mother seemed even more despondent than
usual, but as she invariably replied that there was nothing the matter
with her when she was questioned on the subject, her son decided to
speak only of Hulda's marriage.

"Mother," he began, "you, of course, recollect that Ole announced in
his last letter that he should probably return to Dal in a few weeks."

"It is certainly to be hoped that he will," replied Dame Hansen, "and
that nothing will occur to occasion any further delay."

"Do you see any objection to our fixing upon the twenty-fifth of May
as the day of the marriage?"

"None, whatever, if Hulda is willing."

"Her consent is already given. And now I think I had better ask
you, mother, if you do not intend to do the handsome thing on that
occasion?"

"What do you mean by the handsome thing?" retorted Dame Hansen,
without raising her eyes from her spinning-wheel.

"Why, I am anxious, if you approve, of course, that the wedding should
correspond with the position we hold in the neighborhood. We ought to
invite all our friends to it, and if our own house is not large enough
to accommodate them, our neighbors, I am sure, will be glad to lodge
our guests."

"Who will these guests be, Joel?"

"Why, I think we ought to invite all our friends from Moel, Tiness and
Bamble. I will attend to that. I think, too, that the presence of Help
Bros., the shipowners, would be an honor to the family, and with your
consent, I repeat, I will invite them to spend a day with us at Dal.
They are very fine men, and they think a great deal of Ole, so I am
almost sure that they will accept the invitation."

"Is it really necessary to make this marriage such an important
event?" inquired Dame Hansen, coldly.

"I think so, mother, if only for the sake of our inn, which I am sure
has maintained its old reputation since my father's death."

"Yes, Joel, yes."

"And it seems to me that it is our duty to at least keep it up to
the standard at which he left it; consequently, I think it would be
advisable to give considerable publicity to my sister's marriage."

"So be it, Joel."

"And do you not agree with me in thinking that it is quite time
for Hulda to begin her preparations, and what do you say to my
suggestion?"

"I think that you and Hulda must do whatever you think necessary,"
replied Dame Hansen.

Perhaps the reader will think that Joel was in too much of a hurry,
and that it would have been much more sensible in him to have waited
until Ole's return before appointing the wedding-day, and beginning to
prepare for it, but as he said, what was once done would not have to
be done over again; besides, the countless details connected with a
ceremonial of this kind would serve to divert Hulda's mind from these
forebodings for which there seemed to be no foundation.

The first thing to be done was to select the bride's maid of honor.
That proved an easy matter, however, for Hulda's choice was already
made. The bride-maid, of course, must be Hulda's intimate friend,
Farmer Helmboe's daughter. Her father was a prominent man, and the
possessor of a very comfortable fortune. For a long time he had
fully appreciated Joel's sterling worth, and his daughter Siegfrid's
appreciation, though of a rather different nature, was certainly no
less profound; so it was quite probable that at no very distant day
after Siegfrid had served as Hulda's maid of honor, Hulda, in turn,
would act in the same capacity for her friend. This is the custom in
Norway, where these pleasant duties are generally reserved for married
women, so it was rather on Joel's account that Siegfrid Helmboe was to
serve Hulda Hansen in this capacity.

A question of vital importance to the bride-maid as well as to the
bride, is the toilet to be worn on the day of the wedding.

Siegfrid, a pretty blonde of eighteen summers, was firmly resolved
to appear to the best possible advantage on the occasion. Warned by
a short note from her friend Hulda--Joel had kindly made himself
responsible for its safe delivery--she immediately proceeded to devote
her closest attention to this important work.

In the first place, an elaborately embroidered bodice must be made to
incase Siegfrid's charming figure as if in a coat of enamel. There
was also much talk about a skirt composed of a series of jupons which
should correspond in number with the wearer's fortune, but in no way
detract from her charms of person. As for jewelry, it was no easy
matter to select the design of the collar of silver filigree, set with
pearls, the heart-shaped ear-rings, the double buttons to fasten the
neck of the chemisette, the belt of red silk or woolen stuff from
which depend four rows of small chains, the finger-rings studded
with tiny bangles that tinkle musically, the bracelets of fretted
silver--in short, all the wealth of country finery in which gold
appears only in the shape of the thinnest plating, silver in the guise
of tin and pearls, and diamonds in the shape of wax and crystal beads.
But what does that matter so long as the _tout ensemble_ is pleasing
to the eye? Besides, if necessary, Siegfrid would not hesitate to
go to the elegant stores of M. Benett, in Christiania, to make her
purchases. Her father would not object--far from it! The kind-hearted
man allowed his daughter full liberty in such matters; besides,
Siegfrid was sensible enough not to draw too heavily upon her father's
purse, though everything else was of secondary importance provided
Joel would see her at her very best on that particular day.

As for Hulda, her anxiety on the subject was no less serious, for
fashions are pitiless, and give, besides, not a little trouble in the
selection of their wedding-toilet.

Hulda would now be obliged to abandon the long plaits tied with bright
ribbons, which had heretofore hung from under her coquettish cap, the
broad belt with fancy buckles that kept her apron in place upon
her scarlet skirt, the girdle to which were appended several small
embroidered leather cases containing a silver tea-spoon, knife, fork,
needle-case and scissors--articles which a woman makes constant use of
in the household.

No, on the fast approaching day of the nuptials, Hulda's hair would be
allowed to float down upon her shoulders, and it was so abundant
that it would not be necessary for her to have recourse to the jute
switches used by Norwegian girls less favored by nature. Indeed,
for her clothing, as well as for her ornaments, Hulda would only be
obliged to resort to her mother's big chest. In fact, these articles
of clothing are transmitted from marriage to marriage through all
the different generations of the same family. So one sees reappearing
again and again upon the scene the bodice embroidered in gold, the
velvet sash, the skirt of striped silk, the gold chain for the neck,
and the crown--the famous Scandinavian crown--carefully preserved in
the most secure of all the chests, and made of pasteboard covered
with embossed gilt paper, and studded with stars, or garlanded with
leaves--that takes the place of the wreath of orange-blossoms worn by
brides in other European countries.

In this case the crowned betrothed, as the bride is styled, would
certainly do honor to her husband; and he would be worthy of her in
his gay wedding suit: a short jacket trimmed with silver buttons,
silk-embroidered waistcoat, tight breeches fastened at the knee with a
bunch of bright ribbons, a soft felt hat, yellow top-boots, and in
his belt the Scandinavian knife--the dolknife--with which the true
Norwegian is always provided.

Consequently, there was plenty to occupy the attention of the young
ladies for some time to come. Two or three weeks would barely suffice
if they wished to have everything in readiness before Ole's return;
but even if Ole should arrive sooner than he expected, and Hulda
should not be quite ready, she would not be inconsolable, nor would
he.

The last weeks of April and the first weeks of May were devoted
to these matters. Joel assumed charge of the invitations, taking
advantage of the fact that his vocation of guide gave him considerable
leisure at this season of the year. One would have supposed that he
had a large number of friends in Bamble, for he went there very often.
He had already written to Help Bros., inviting them to attend his
sister's wedding, and in accordance with his prediction, these worthy
shipowners had promptly accepted the invitation.

The fifteenth of May came, and any day now they might expect Ole to
alight from his kariol, throw open the door, and shout in his hearty,
cheerful voice:

"It is I! Here I am!"

A little patience was all that was needed now, for everything was in
readiness, and Siegfrid needed only a word to appear before them in
all her splendor.

The 16th and 17th passed, and still no Ole, nor did the postman bring
any letter from Newfoundland.

"There is no cause for anxiety, little sister," Joel said, again and
again. "A sailing-vessel is always subject to delays. It is a long
way from St. Pierre-Miquelon to Bergen. How I wish the 'Viking' were
a steamer and I the engine. How I would drive along against wind and
tide, even if I should burst my boiler on coming into port."

He said all this because he saw very plainly that Hulda's uneasiness
was increasing from day to day.

Just at this time, too, the weather was very bad in the Telemark.
Violent gales swept the high table-lands, and these winds, which blew
from the west, came from America.

"They ought to have hastened the arrival of the 'Viking,'" the young
girl repeated again and again.

"Yes, little sister," replied Joel; "but they are so strong that they
may have hindered its progress, and compelled it to face the gale.
People can't always do as they like upon the sea."

"So you are not uneasy, Joel?"

"No, Hulda, no. It is annoying, of course, but these delays are very
common. No; I am not uneasy, for there is really not the slightest
cause for anxiety."

On the 19th a traveler arrived at the inn, and asked for a guide to
conduct him over the mountains to the Hardanger, and though Joel did
not like the idea of leaving Hulda, he could not refuse his services.
He would only be absent forty-eight hours at the longest, and he felt
confident that he should find Ole at Dal on his return, though, to
tell the truth, the kind-hearted youth was beginning to feel very
uneasy. Still, he started off early the next morning, though with a
heavy heart, we must admit.

On the following day, at precisely one o'clock, a loud rap resounded
at the door of the inn.

"It is Ole!" cried Hulda.

She ran to the door.

There, in a kariol, sat a man enveloped in a traveling-cloak, a man
whose face was unknown to her.




CHAPTER VI.


"Is this Dame Hansen's inn?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," answered Hulda.

"Is Dame Hansen at home?"

"No; but she will soon return, and if you wish to speak to her--"

"I do not. There is nothing I want to say to her."

"Would you like a room?"

"Yes; the best in the house."

"Shall we prepare dinner for you?"

"As soon as possible, and see to it that everything is of the very
best quality."

These remarks were exchanged between Hulda and the traveler before the
latter had alighted from the kariol, in which he had journeyed to
the heart of the Telemark across the forests, lakes, and valleys of
Central Norway.

Every one who has visited Scandinavia is familiar with the kariol,
the means of locomotion so dear to the hearts of her people. Two long
shafts, between which trots a horse wearing a square wooden collar,
painted yellow and striped with black, and guided with a simple rope
passed, not through his mouth, but around his nose, two large,
slender wheels, whose springless axle supports a small gay-colored,
shell-shaped wagon-body, scarcely large enough to hold one person--no
covering, no dash-board, no step--but behind, a board upon which the
_skydskarl_ perches himself. The whole vehicle strongly reminds one of
an enormous spider between two huge cobwebs represented by the wheels
of the vehicle.

At a sign from the traveler the _skydskarl_ sprung to the horse's
head, and the stranger rose, straightened himself out, and finally
alighted, though not without some difficulty, judging from two or
three muttered curses.

"Will they put my kariol under shelter?" he asked, curtly, pausing
upon the threshold.

"Yes, sir," replied Hulda.

"And find my horse?"

"I will have him put in the stable immediately."

"Have him well cared for."

"Certainly, sir. May I ask if you intend to remain in Dal several
days?"

"I don't know yet."

The kariol and horse were taken to a small barn built under the
shelter of some trees at the foot of the mountain. It was the only
stable connected with the inn, but it sufficed for the requirements of
its guests.

In a few moments the traveler was duly installed in the best chamber,
where, after removing his cloak, he proceeded to warm himself before
the fire he had ordered lighted. In the meantime, Hulda, to satisfy
this exacting guest, bade the _piga_ (a sturdy peasant-girl, who
helped in the kitchen, and did the rough work of the inn during the
summer) prepare the best dinner possible.

A strong, hardy man was this new-comer, though he had already passed
his sixtieth year. Thin, slightly round-shouldered, of medium stature,
with an angular head, smoothly shaven face, thin, pointed nose, small
eyes that looked you through and through from behind large spectacles,
a forehead generally contracted by a frown, lips too thin for a
pleasant word ever to escape them, and long, crooked fingers, he was
the very personification of an avaricious usurer or miser, and Hulda
felt a presentiment that this stranger would bring no good fortune to
Dame Hansen's house.

He was a Norwegian unquestionably, but one of the very worst type.
His traveling costume consisted of a broad-brimmed, low-crowned hat,
a snuff-colored suit, the breeches fastened at the knee with a leather
strap, and over all a large brown cloak, lined with sheep-skin to
protect its wearer from the chilly night air.

Hulda did not ask him his name, but she would soon learn it, as he
would have to enter it upon the inn register.

Just then Dame Hansen returned, and her daughter announced the arrival
of a guest who demanded the best room and the best food that the inn
afforded, but who vouchsafed no information in regard to the probable
length of his stay.

"And he did not give his name?" asked Dame Hansen.

"No, mother."

"Nor say whence he came?"

"No."

"If he is not a tourist, what can have brought him to Dal?" said Dame
Hansen to herself rather than to her daughter, and in a tone that
indicated some uneasiness.

But Hulda could not answer this question, as the new-comer had
acquainted her with none of his plans.

About an hour after his arrival the man came out into the main hall,
from which his door opened, but seeing Dame Hansen sitting there, he
paused upon the threshold.

Evidently he was as much of a stranger to his hostess as his hostess
was to him; but he finally walked toward her, and after a long look at
her from over his spectacles:

"You are Dame Hansen, I suppose?" he said, without even touching the
hat he had not yet removed from his head.

"Yes, sir."

In the presence of this man the widow, strange to say, experienced,
like her daughter, an uneasiness for which she could not account, but
which her guest must have noticed.

"So you are really Dame Hansen, of Dal?" he continued.

"Certainly, sir. Have you anything particular to say to me?"

"Nothing; I only wished to make your acquaintance. Am I not your
guest? And now I should like you to see that I have my dinner as soon
as possible."

"Your dinner is ready," interposed Hulda, "and if you will step into
the dining-room--"

"I will."

As he spoke, the stranger directed his steps toward the door
indicated, and a moment afterward he was seated near the window in
front of a small, neatly spread table.

The dinner was certainly good. The most fastidious traveler could not
have found fault with it; nevertheless, this ill-tempered individual
was not sparing in his signs and words of dissatisfaction--especially
signs, for he did not appear to be very loquacious. One could hardly
help wondering whether this fault-finding was due to a poor digestion
or a bad temper. The soup of cherries and gooseberries did not suit
him, though it was excellent, and he scarcely tasted his salmon
and salt-herring. The cold ham, broiled chicken and nicely seasoned
vegetables did not seem to please him, and his bottle of claret and
his half bottle of champagne seemed to be equally unsatisfactory,
though they came from the best cellars in France; and when the repast
was concluded the guest had not even a "_tack for mad_" for his
hostess.

After dinner the old curmudgeon lighted his pipe and went out for a
walk along the river bank.

On reaching the stream he turned and fixed his eyes upon the inn. He
seemed to be studying it under all its varied aspects, as if trying to
form a correct estimate of its value.

He counted every door and window, and finally on his return to the
inn he stuck his knife into the horizontal beams at its base, as if to
test the quality of the wood and its state of preservation. Could
it be that he was trying to find out how much Dame Hansen's inn was
really worth? Did he aspire to become the owner of it, though it was
not for sale? All this was certainly very strange, especially as
he afterward turned his attention to the little yard, the trees and
shrubs of which he counted carefully, and finally measured both sides
of the inclosure with regular strides, after which the movement of his
pencil over a page of his memorandum-book seemed to indicate that he
was multiplying one by the other.

All the while Dame Hansen and her daughter were watching him from one
of the windows of the inn. What strange creature was this, and what
could be the object of his visit? It was greatly to be regretted that
all this took place during Joel's absence, especially as the eccentric
individual was going to spend the night at the inn.

"What if he is a madman?" said Hulda.

"A madman? no," replied Dame Hansen. "But he is a very eccentric
person, to say the least."

"It is always unpleasant to be ignorant of the name of the person you
are entertaining," remarked the young girl.

"Before he re-enters the house, Hulda, be sure that you carry the
register into his room. Perhaps he will conclude to write his name in
it."

"Yes, mother."

Just at dusk a fine rain began to fall, so the stranger returned to
the inn. He asked for a small glass of brandy, then without saying
a word, or even bidding any one good-night, he took his wooden
candlestick, and entering his room bolted the door behind him, and
nothing further was heard from him that night.

The _skydskarl_ had taken refuge in the barn, where he was already
sound asleep in company with the sorrel horse.

Dame Hansen and her daughter rose with the sun the next morning, but
no sound came from the room of their guest, who was probably still
sleeping. A little after nine o'clock he made his appearance even more
glum and ill-tempered than the evening before, complaining that his
bed had been hard, and that the noise in the house had kept him
awake; then he opened the door and looked out at the sky.

The prospect was not very cheering, certainly, for the wind was
blowing a gale, and the stranger concluded not to venture out. Still
he did not waste his time. With his pipe in his mouth he walked about
the inn as if trying to familiarize himself with the arrangement
of the interior. He visited all the different rooms, examined the
furniture, and peered into cupboards and sideboards with as much
coolness as if he had been in his own house.

Though the man was singular in appearance, his actions were certainly
even more singular. Finally he seated himself in the big arm-chair,
and proceeded to question Dame Hansen in a curt, almost rude tone. How
long had the inn been built? Was it her husband that built it, or did
he inherit it? How much land was there around it, and what was the
extent of the adjoining _souter_? Was the inn well patronized, and
did it pay well? How many tourists came there on an average during the
summer? Did they usually spend one or several days there? etc., etc.

It was evident that the stranger had not looked at the register that
had been placed in his room, for that would have given him all the
information he desired upon this last point.

In fact, the book was still on the table where Hulda had placed it the
evening before, and the traveler's name was not in it.

"I do not understand how and why these matters can interest you, sir,"
said Dame Hansen at last; "but if you wish to know the state of
our business, nothing could be easier. You have only to examine the
register, in which you would greatly oblige me by entering your name
according to custom."

"My name? I will write my name in it, certainly. I will write it there
before I leave, which will be immediately after breakfast, as I am
anxious to get back to Drammen by to-morrow evening."

"Drammen!" repeated Dame Hansen, hastily.

"Yes. Will you give me my breakfast as soon as possible?"

"Do you live in Drammen?"

"Yes. May I ask if there is anything astonishing about the fact that I
reside in Drammen?"

So, after spending scarcely twenty-four hours in Dal, or rather at
the inn, the traveler left without making the slightest effort to see
anything of the surrounding country, Gousta, and Rjukanfos, and the
wonders of the valley of the Vesfjorddal were entirely ignored.

It certainly could not have been for pleasure that he left Drammen, so
he must have come on business, and the sole object of his visit seemed
to have been a careful examination of Dame Hansen's establishment.

It was plain to Hulda that her mother was deeply troubled, for
she seated herself in her big arm-chair, and pushing aside her
spinning-wheel, remained there silent and motionless.

In the meantime the traveler had gone into the dining-room and seated
himself at the table. Though the breakfast was as carefully prepared
as the dinner of the evening before, it seemed to give no better
satisfaction; and yet the guest eat and drank in the same leisurely
fashion. His attention seemed to be chiefly bestowed upon the
silver--a luxury highly prized among Norwegian peasants, where the
few forks and spoons which are handed down from father to son are
carefully preserved with the family jewels.

Meanwhile the _skydskarl_ busied himself with his preparations for
departure; and by eleven o'clock the horse and kariol were standing
before the door of the inn.

The weather was still threatening; the sky was dull and overcast, and
now and then big drops of rain dashed against the window-panes; but
this traveler with his heavy cloak lined with sheep-skin was not a man
to worry about the weather.

Breakfast over, he called for one more glass of brandy, lighted his
pipe, and put on his coat, then stepping out into the hall he called
for his bill.

"I will make it out immediately," replied Hulda, seating herself at a
small desk.

"Be quick about it," said the traveler. "And now," he added, "you had
better bring me your book so I can write my name in it."

Dame Hansen rose and left the room to get the register, which, on her
return, she placed upon the large table.

The stranger picked up a pen and took one more long look at Dame
Hansen over his spectacles; then he wrote his name in a large, round
hand, and closed the book.

Just at that moment Hulda handed him his bill. He took it, examined
each item separately, and then proceeded to add up the figures,
grumbling all the while.

"Hum!" he exclaimed. "This is very dear! Seven marks and a half for a
night's lodging and two meals!"

"You forget the _skydskarl_ and the horse," remarked Hulda.

"Nevertheless, I think your charge very high. I really don't see how
you can expect to prosper if you are so exorbitant in your charges."

"You owe me nothing, sir," said Dame Hansen, in a voice that trembled
so that it was scarcely audible.

She had just opened the register and read the name inscribed upon it,
and now taking the bill and tearing it up, she repeated:

"You owe me nothing."

"That is exactly my opinion,'" replied the stranger.

And without bidding them good-bye on his departure any more than he
had bidden them good-day on his arrival, he climbed into his kariol,
and the _skydskarl_ jumped upon the board behind him. A few seconds
later he had disappeared around a turn in the road. When Hulda opened
the book she found there only this name--

"Sandgoist, from Drammen."




CHAPTER VII.


It was on the afternoon of the following day that Joel was to return
home; and Hulda, who knew that her brother would come back by the
table-lands of the Gousta and along the left bank of the Maan, went to
meet him at the ferry across that impetuous stream. On arriving there
she seated herself on the little wharf which serves as a landing-place
for the ferry-boat, and abandoned herself to her thoughts.

To the deep uneasiness caused by the non-arrival of the "Viking"
was now added another great anxiety. This last was caused by the
mysterious visit of Sandgoist, and Dame Hansen's agitation in his
presence. Why had she destroyed the bill and declined to accept the
money due her as soon as she learned her guest's name? There must be
some secret concealed under all this--and a grave one.

Hulda was finally aroused from her reverie by the approach of Joel.
She first caught a glimpse of him as he was descending the topmost
slope; soon he reappeared in the midst of a narrow clearing between
the burned and fallen trees. Then he vanished from sight behind a
clump of pines, and at last reached the opposite bank and jumped
aboard the ferry-boat. With a few vigorous strokes of the oar he
propelled the boat swiftly through the rapids, and then leaped upon
the little pier beside his sister.

"Has Ole returned?" he asked, hastily.

It was of Ole that he thought first of all; but his question remained
unanswered.

"Have you received no letter from him?"

"Not one."

And Hulda burst into tears.

"Don't cry, little sister," exclaimed Joel, "don't cry. You make me
wretched. I can not bear to see you weep. Let me see! You say you have
received no letter. The matter is beginning to look a little serious,
I must admit, though there is no reason to despair as yet. If you
desire it, I will go to Bergen, and make inquiries there. I will call
on Help Bros. Possibly they may have some news from Newfoundland. It
is quite possible that the 'Viking' may have put into some port for
repairs, or on account of bad weather. The wind has been blowing
a hurricane for more than a week, and not unfrequently ships from
Newfoundland take refuge in Iceland, or at the Faroe Islands. This
very thing happened to Ole two years ago, when he was on board the
'Strenna,' you remember. I am only saying what I really think, little
sister. Dry your eyes. If you make me lose heart what will become of
us?"

"But I can't help it, Joel."

"Hulda! Hulda! do not lose courage. I assure you that I do not
despair, not by any means."

"Can I really believe you, Joel?"

"Yes, you can. Now, to reassure you, shall I start for Bergen
to-morrow morning, or this very evening?"

"No, no, you must not leave me! No, you must not!" sobbed Hulda,
clinging to her brother as if he was the only friend she had left in
the world.

They started toward the inn. Joel sheltered his sister from the rain
as well as he could, but the wind soon became so violent that they
were obliged to take refuge in the hut of the ferryman, which stood a
few hundred yards from the bank of the Maan.

There they were obliged to remain until the wind abated a little, and
Joel was glad of an opportunity to have a longer conversation with his
sister.

"How does mother seem?" he inquired.

"Even more depressed in spirits than usual," replied Hulda.

"Has any one been here during my absence?"

"Yes, one traveler, but he has gone away."

"So there is no tourist at the inn now, and no one has asked for a
guide?"

"No, Joel."

"So much the better, for I would much rather not leave you. Besides,
if this unpleasant weather continues, it is not likely that many
tourists will visit the Telemark this season. But tell me, was it
yesterday that your guest left Dal?"

"Yes, yesterday morning."

"Who was he?"

"A man who resides in Drammen, and whose name is Sandgoist."

"Sandgoist?"

"Do you know him?"

"No."

Hulda had asked herself more than once if she should tell her brother
all that had occurred in his absence. When Joel heard how coolly their
guest had conducted himself, and how he seemed to have come merely to
appraise the house and its contents, what would he think? Would not
he, too, fear that his mother must have had grave reasons for acting
as she had? What were these reasons? What could there be in common
between her and Sandgoist? Joel would certainly desire to know, and
would be sure to question his mother, and as Dame Hansen, who was
always so uncommunicative, would doubtless persist in the silence she
had maintained hitherto, the relations between her and her children,
which were so unnatural and constrained now, would become still more
unpleasant.

But would Hulda be able to keep anything from Joel? A secret from him!
Would it not be a violation of the close friendship that united them?
No, this friendship must never be broken! So Hulda suddenly resolved
to tell him all.

"Have you ever heard any one speak of this Sandgoist when you were in
Drammen?" she asked.

"Never."

"But our mother knew him, Joel; at least by name."

"She knew Sandgoist?"

"Yes."

"I certainly never heard the name before."

"But she has, though she had never seen the man until day before
yesterday."

Then Hulda related all the incidents that had marked Sandgoist's
sojourn at the inn, not neglecting to mention Dame Hansen's singular
conduct at the moment of his departure. Then she hastened to add:

"I think, Joel, it would be best not to say anything to mother about
it at present. You know her disposition, and it would only make her
still more unhappy. The future will probably reveal what has been
concealed from us in the past. Heaven grant that Ole may be restored
to us, and then if any misfortune should befall the family there will
at least be three of us to share it."

Joel had listened to his sister with profound attention. Yes, it
was evident that Dame Hansen must be at this man's mercy, and it
was impossible to doubt that he had come to take an inventory of
the property. And the destruction of the bill at the time of his
departure--a destruction that seemed only right and proper to
him--what could be the meaning of that?

"You are right, Hulda," said Joel. "I had better not say anything to
mother about it. Perhaps she will feel sorry by and by that she has
not confided in us. Heaven grant that it may not be too late! She must
be wretched, poor woman! How strange it is that she can not understand
that her children were born to sympathize with her."

"She will find it out some day, Joel."

"Yes; so let us wait patiently, little sister. Still, there is no
reason why I should not try to find out who the man is. Perhaps Farmer
Helmboe knows him. I will ask him the first time I go to Bamble, and
if need be I will push on to Drammen. There it will not be difficult
for me to at least learn what the man does, and what people think of
him."

"They do not think well of him, I am sure," replied Hulda. "His face
is very unprepossessing, and I shall be very much surprised if there
is a noble soul concealed under such a repulsive exterior."

"Come, come, little sister, it will not do to judge people by outward
appearances," exclaimed Joel. "Don't be so suspicious, Hulda, and
cheer up. Ole will soon be with us, and we will scold him roundly for
having kept us waiting."

The rain having ceased the pair left the hut and started up the path
leading to the inn.

"By the way, I must go away again to-morrow, little sister," said
Joel.

"Go away again to-morrow!" repeated Hulda.

"Yes, early in the morning. On leaving the Hardanger I was informed
by a comrade that a traveler, coming from the north by way of the
Rjukanfos would arrive to-morrow."

"Who is this traveler?"

"I don't know his name, but I must be on hand to conduct him to Dal."

"Ah, well! go, then, as there is no help for it," replied Hulda, with
a sigh.

"Yes, I must start to-morrow at sunrise. Do you really feel so badly
about it, Hulda?"

"Yes, brother, I feel much more unhappy when you leave me, even if it
is only for a few hours."

"Ah, well, this time I shall not go alone."

"Why, who is to accompany you?"

"You, little sister. You need diversion, and I am going to take you
with me."

"Oh, thank you, Joel, thank you!"




CHAPTER VIII.


The brother and sister left the inn at sunrise the next morning. The
fifteen mile walk from Dal to the celebrated falls of the Rjukan,
and back again, was a mere trifle for Joel, but it was necessary to
economize Hulda's strength, so Joel hired foreman Lengling's kariol.
This, like all kariols, had but one seat, but the worthy man was so
large that he had been obliged to have his kariol built to order, and
this being the case the vehicle was large enough to enable Hulda
and Joel to sit side by side quite comfortably; and if the expected
tourist was waiting for them at Rjukanfos as they anticipated, he
could take Joel's place and the latter could either return afoot or
mounted upon the step behind the kariol.

The road from Dal to the falls is very rough but indescribably
charming. It is really rather a footpath than a road. The bridges
across the countless streams that dance merrily along to the Maan are
all constructed of unhewn logs, but the Norwegian horse traverses them
with a sure step, and though the kariol has no springs, its long and
slightly elastic shafts soften the jolting at least to some extent.

The day was charming, and Hulda and Joel drove along at a brisk pace
through the flowery fields, bathed on the left by the clear waters of
the Maan. Clumps of birches here and there shaded the sunny road, and
the dew still glittered on the blades of grass. To the right of the
torrent towered the snow-clad summit of the Gousta, which rises to an
altitude of six thousand feet.

For nearly an hour, the vehicle moved on rapidly, the ascent being
comparatively slight; but soon the valley became narrower, the gay
rivulets were transformed into foaming torrents, and though the
road wound in and out it could not avoid all the inequalities of the
ground. Beyond came really dangerous passes, through which Joel guided
the vehicle with no little skill; besides, with him Hulda feared
nothing. When the road was very rough she clung to his arm, and the
freshness of the morning air brought a glow to the pretty face which
had been unusually pale for some time.

But it was necessary for them to ascend to still greater heights,
for the valley here contracted into merely a narrow channel for the
passage of the river, a channel inclosed on either side by massive
walls of rock. Over the neighboring fields were scattered a few
dilapidated farm-houses, the remains of _soeters_, which were now
abandoned, and a few shepherd's huts almost hidden from view by clumps
of birches and oaks. Soon it became impossible for them to see the
river, though they could distinctly hear it dashing along in its rocky
channel, and the country assumed an indescribably wild and imposing
aspect.

A drive of two hours brought them to a rough saw-mill perched upon
the edge of a water-fall at least fifteen hundred feet in height.
Water-falls of this height are by no means rare in the Vesfjorddal,
but the volume of water is usually small. This is not the case with
the falls of the Rjukanfos however.

On reaching the saw-mill, Joel and Hulda both alighted.

"A half hour's walk will not be too much for you, will it, little
sister?" asked Joel.

"No, brother; I am not tired, and a little exercise will do me good."

"It will be a good deal instead of a little, for you will have some
pretty hard climbing to do."

"I can cling to your arm, Joel."

It was evident that the kariol must be abandoned at this point, for
it would be impossible for it to make its way through the rough paths,
the narrow passes, and over the big, fantastically shaped rocks that
heralded the close proximity of the great falls.

Already, they could see in the distance a thick mist, the spray from
the seething waters of Rjukan.

Hulda and Joel took a shady path which is well known to guides, and
which leads to the end of the valley. A few moments afterward they
found themselves upon a moss-covered rock almost in front of the fall.
In fact there was no chance of getting any nearer to it on that side.

The brother and sister would have had considerable difficulty in
making themselves heard if they had wished to speak; but their
thoughts were those that could be exchanged without the agency of the
lips.

The volume of the Rjukan fall is enormous, its height very
considerable, and its roar deafening. The earth makes an abrupt
descent of nine hundred feet to the bed of the Maan midway between
Lake Mjos and Lake Tinn, nine hundred feet, that is to say six times
the height of Niagara, though the width of this last water-fall from
the American to the Canadian shore is three miles.

The Rjukan is so grand and unique in its aspect that any description
falls far short of the reality, and even a painting can not do justice
to it. There are certain wonders of nature that must be seen if
one would form any adequate conception of their beauty; and this
water-fall, which is one of the most widely celebrated in Europe,
belongs to this category.

These were the very thoughts that were passing through the mind of a
tourist who was at that very moment sitting perched upon a rock on the
right bank of the Maan, from which spot he could command a nearer and
more extended view of the fall.

Neither Joel nor his sister had yet noticed him, though he was plainly
visible from the rock on which they were seated.

In a few minutes the traveler rose and very imprudently ventured out
upon the rocky slope that is rounded like a dome on the side next the
Maan. What the adventurous tourist wished to see was evidently the two
caverns under the fall, the one to the left, which is ever filled to
the top with a mass of seething foam, and the one to the right, which
is always enshrouded in a heavy mist. Possibly he was even trying to
ascertain if there were not a third cavern midway down the fall to
account for the fact that the Rjukan at intervals projects straight
outward into space a mass of water and spray, making it appear as
if the waters had suddenly been scattered in a fine spray over the
surrounding fields by some terrific explosion in the rear of the fall.

And now the daring tourist was slowly but persistently making his
way over the rough and slippery ledge of rock, destitute alike of
shrubbery or grass, know as the Passe de Marie, or the Maristien.

It is more than probable, however, that he was ignorant of the legend
that has made this pass so widely know. One day Eystein endeavored
to reach his betrothed, the beautiful Marie of Vesfjorddal, by this
dangerous path. His sweetheart was holding out her arms to him from
the other side of the gorge, when suddenly he lost his footing, fell,
slipped further and further down the ledge of rock which is as smooth
as glass, and disappeared forever in the seething rapids of the Maan.

Was this rash traveler about to meet a similar fate?

It seemed only too probable; and in fact he soon perceived the danger
of his position, though not until it was too late. Suddenly his foot
slipped, he uttered a cry, and after rolling nearly twenty feet, he
finally succeeded in securing a hold upon a projecting rock on the
very edge of the abyss.

Joel and Hulda, though they had not yet caught sight of him, heard his
cry.

"What is that?" exclaimed Joel, springing to his feet.

"A cry!" replied Hulda.

"Yes, a cry of distress."

"From what direction did it come?"

"Let us listen."

Both looked first to the right, and then to the left of the fall, but
they saw nothing, though they had certainly heard the words "Help!
help!" uttered during one of the intervals between each rebound of the
Rjukan.

The cry was repeated.

"Joel, some one who is in danger is calling for help," cried Hulda.
"We must go to his aid."

"Yes, sister; and he can not be far off. But in what direction? Where
is he? I see no one."

Hulda hastily climbed a little knoll behind the mossy rock upon which
she had been sitting.

"Joel!" she cried, suddenly.

"Do you see him?"

"There, there!"

As she spoke she pointed to the imprudent man whose body seemed to
be almost overhanging the abyss. If his foothold upon a tiny ledge of
rock failed him, or he was seized with dizziness, he was lost.

"We must save him!" said Hulda.

"Yes," replied Joel, "if we can keep our wits about us we shall
perhaps be able to reach him."

Joel gave a loud shout to attract the attention of the traveler,
who immediately turned his head toward the spot from which the sound
proceeded; then the worthy fellow devoted a few moments to deciding
how he could best rescue the stranger from his dangerous position.

"You are not afraid, are you, Hulda?" he asked.

"No, brother."

"You know the Maristien well, do you not?"

"I have crossed it several times."

"Then walk along the brow of the cliff, gradually getting as near the
traveler as you possibly can; then allow yourself to slide down
gently toward him, and take him by the hand, so as to prevent him
from falling any further; but do not let him try to lift himself up,
because if he should be seized with vertigo he would certainly drag
you down with him, and you would both be lost."

"And you, Joel?"

"While you are traversing the brow of the cliff I will creep along the
edge of it on the river-side. I shall reach him about as soon as you
do, and if you should slip I shall perhaps be able to prevent you both
from falling."

Then, taking advantage of another interval in the roaring of the
torrent, Joel shouted in stentorian tones:

"Don't move, sir. Wait; we will try to get to you!"

Hulda had already disappeared behind the trees that crowned the ledge,
in order to ascend the Maristien from the other side of the declivity,
and Joel soon caught a glimpse of the fast-receding form of the brave
girl at the turn in the path where the last trees grew.

He, in turn, at the peril of his life, had begun to creep slowly
along the shelving edge of the ledge that surrounds the Rjukan. What
wonderful coolness, what steadiness of foot and of hand were required
to thus advance in safety along the edge of an abyss whose borders
were drenched with the spray of the cataract!

In a parallel direction, but at least one hundred feet above his head,
Hulda was advancing obliquely in order to reach the traveler more
easily; but the position of the latter was such that she could not see
his face, that being turned toward the cataract.

Joel, on reaching a spot directly below the unfortunate man paused,
and after planting his foot firmly in a small crevice in the rock,
called out:

"Hallo, sir!"

The traveler turned his head.

"Don't move, sir; don't move an inch, but hold fast!"

"I'll do that, my friend, never fear," replied the stranger in a tone
that reassured Joel. "If I hadn't a good grip, I should have gone to
the bottom of the Rjukan a quarter of an hour ago."

"My sister is also coming to help you," continued Joel. "She will take
hold of your hand, but don't attempt to get upon your feet until I
reach you. Don't even move."

"No more than a rock," replied the traveler.

Hulda had already begun to descend the ledge, carefully selecting
the less slippery parts of the slope with the clear head of a true
daughter of the Telemark.

And she, too, now called out as Joel had done:

"Holdfast, sir."

"Yes; I am holding fast, and I assure you that I shall continue to do
so as long as I can."

"And above all don't be afraid!" added Hulda.

"I am not afraid."

"We'll save you yet!" cried Joel.

"I hope so, indeed; for by Saint Olaf I shall never succeed in getting
out of this scrape myself."

It was evident that the tourist had lost none of his presence of mind;
but his fall had probably disabled him, and all he could do now was to
keep himself upon the narrow shelf of rock that separated him from the
abyss.

Meanwhile Hulda continued her descent, and in a few minutes reached
the traveler; then, bracing her foot against a projecting point in the
rock, she caught hold of his hand.

The traveler involuntarily attempted to raise himself a little.

"Don't move, sir, don't move," cried Hulda. "You will be sure to drag
me down with you, for I am not strong enough to keep you from falling!
You must wait until my brother reaches us. When he gets between us and
the fall you can then try to get up."

"That is more easily said than done I fear."

"Are you so much hurt, sir? I hope you have broken no bones."

"No; but one leg is badly cut and scratched."

Joel was about twenty yards from them, the rounded shape of the brow
of the cliff having prevented him from joining them at once. He was
now obliged to climb this rounded surface. This was, of course, the
most difficult and also the most dangerous part of his task.

"Don't make the slightest movement, Hulda!" he cried. "If you should
both slip while I am not in a position to break your fall you would
both be killed."

"You need not fear that, Joel!" replied Hulda. "Think only of
yourself, and may God help you!"

Joel began to crawl slowly up the rock, dragging himself along on his
belly like a veritable reptile. Two or three times he narrowly
escaped sliding down into the abyss below, but finally he succeeded in
reaching the traveler's side.

The latter proved to be an elderly but still vigorous-looking
man, with a handsome face, animated with a very genial and kindly
expression.

"You have been guilty of a very imprudent act, sir," remarked Joel as
soon as he recovered his breath.

"Imprudent!" repeated the traveler. "Yes, and as absurd as it was
imprudent."

"You have not only risked your life, but--"

"Made you risk yours."

"Oh! that is my business," replied Joel, lightly. Then he added, in
an entirely different tone: "The thing to be done now is to regain the
brow of the cliff, but the most difficult part of the task is already
accomplished."

"The most difficult?"

"Yes, sir. That was to reach you. Now we have only to ascend a much
more gradual slope.

"Still, you had better not place much dependence upon me, my boy. I
have a leg that isn't of much use to me just now, nor will it be for
some time to come I fear."

"Try to raise yourself a little."

"I will gladly do so if you will assist me."

"Then take hold of my sister's arm. I will steady you and push you
from below."

"Very well, my friends, I will be guided entirely by you; as you have
been so kind as to come to my assistance, I can not do less than yield
you implicit obedience."

Joel's plan was carried out in the most cautious manner, and though
the ascent was not made without considerable difficulty and danger,
all three accomplished it more easily and quickly than they had
thought possible. Besides, the injury from which the traveler was
suffering was neither a sprain nor dislocation, but simply a very bad
abrasion of the skin; consequently, he could use his limbs to much
better purpose than he had supposed, and ten minutes later he found
himself safe on the other side of the Maristien.

Once there, he would have been glad to rest awhile under the pines
that border the upper _field_ of the Rjukanfos, but Joel persuaded
him to make one more effort. This was to reach a hut hidden among the
trees, a short distance from the rock, on which the brother and sister
had seated themselves on first arriving at the fall. The traveler
yielded to their solicitations, and supported on one side by Hulda,
and on the other by Joel, he finally succeeded in reaching the door of
the humble dwelling.

"Let us go in, sir," said Hulda. "You must want to rest a moment."

"The moment will probably be prolonged to a quarter of an hour."

"Very well, sir; but afterward you must consent to accompany us to
Dal."

"To Dal? Why, that is the very place I was going to!"

"Can it be that you are the tourist who was expected from the north?"
asked Joel.

"Precisely."

"Had I foreseen what was going to happen, I should have gone to the
other side of the Rjukanfos to meet you."

"That would have been a good idea, my brave fellow. You would have
saved me from a foolhardy act unpardonable at my age."

"Or at any age," replied Hulda.

The three entered the hut which was occupied by a family of peasants,
a father and two daughters, who received their unexpected guests with
great cordiality.

Joel was able to satisfy himself that the traveler had sustained no
injury beyond a severe abrasion of the skin a little below the knee;
but though the wound would necessitate a week's rest, the limb was
neither broken nor dislocated.

Some excellent milk, an abundance of strawberries, and a little black
bread were offered and accepted. Joel gave incontestable proofs of an
excellent appetite, and though Hulda eat almost nothing, the traveler
proved a match for her brother.

"My exertions have given me a famous appetite," he remarked; "but I
must admit that my attempt to traverse the Maristien was an act of the
grossest folly. To play the part of the unfortunate Eystein when one
is old enough to be his father--and even his grandfather--is absurd in
the highest degree."

"So you know the legend?" said Hulda.

"Of course. My nurse used to sing me to sleep with it in the happy
days when I still had a nurse. Yes, I know the story, my brave girl,
so I am all the more to blame for my imprudence. Now, my friends, Dal
seems a long way off to a cripple like myself. How do you propose to
get me there?"

"Don't worry about that, sir," replied Joel. "Our kariol is waiting
for us at the end of the road, about three hundred yards from here."

"Hum! three hundred yards!"

"But downhill all the way," added Hulda.

"Oh, in that case, I shall do very well if you will kindly lend me an
arm."

"Why not two, as we have four at your disposal?" responded Joel.

"We will say two then. It won't cost me any more, will it?"

"It will cost you nothing."

"Except my thanks; and that reminds me that I have not yet thanked
you."

"For what, sir?" inquired Joel.

"Merely for saving my life at the risk of your own."

"Are you quite ready to start?" inquired Hulda, rising to escape any
further expression of gratitude.

"Certainly, certainly. I am more than willing to be guided by the
wishes of the other members of the party."

The traveler settled the modest charge made by the occupants of the
cottage; then, supported by Joel and Hulda, he began the descent of
the winding path leading to the river bank.

The descent was not effected without many exclamations of pain; but
these exclamations invariably terminated in a hearty laugh, and at
last they reached the saw-mill, where Joel immediately proceeded to
harness the horse into the kariol.

Five minutes later the traveler was installed in the vehicle, with
Hulda beside him.

"But I must have taken your seat," he remarked to Joel.

"A seat I relinquish to you with the utmost willingness."

"But perhaps by a little crowding we might make room for you?"

"No, no, I have my legs, sir--a guide's legs. They are as good as any
wheels."

Joel placed himself at the horse's head, and the little party started
for Dal. The return trip was a gay one, at least on the part of the
traveler, who already seemed to consider himself an old friend of
the Hansen family. Before they reached their destination they found
themselves calling their companion M. Silvius; and that gentleman
unceremoniously called them Hulda and Joel, as if their acquaintance
had been one of long standing.

About four o'clock the little belfry of Dal became visible through the
trees, and a few minutes afterward the horse stopped in front of
the inn. The traveler alighted from the kariol, though not without
considerable difficulty. Dame Hansen hastened to the door to receive
him, and though he did not ask for the best room in the house, it was
given to him all the same.




CHAPTER IX.


Sylvius Hogg was the name that the stranger inscribed upon the
inn register, that same evening, directly underneath the name of
Sandgoist, and there was as great a contrast between the two names
as between the men that bore them. Between them there was nothing
whatever in common, either mentally, morally, or physically. One was
generous to a fault, the other was miserly and parsimonious; one was
genial and kind-hearted, in the arid soul of the other every noble and
humane sentiment seemed to have withered and died.

Sylvius Hogg was nearly sixty years of age, though he did not appear
nearly so old. Tall, erect, and well built, healthy alike in mind and
in body, he pleased at first sight with his handsome genial face, upon
which he wore no beard, but around which clustered curling locks of
silvery hair; eyes which were as smiling as his lips, a broad forehead
that bore the impress of noble thoughts, and a full chest in which
the heart beat untrammeled. To all these charms were added an
inexhaustible fund of good humor, a refined and liberal nature, and a
generous and self-sacrificing disposition.

Sylvius Hogg, of Christiania--no further recommendation was needed.
That told the whole story. And he was not only known, appreciated,
loved and honored in the Norwegian capital, but throughout the entire
country, though the sentiments he inspired in the other half of the
Scandinavian kingdom, that is to say in Sweden, were of an entirely
different character.

This fact can easily be explained.

Sylvius Hogg was a professor of law at Christiania. In some lands to
be a barrister, civil engineer, physician, or merchant, entitles one
to a place on the upper rounds of the social ladder. It is different
in Norway, however. To be a professor there is to be at the top of the
ladder.

Though there are four distinct classes in Sweden, the nobility,
the clergy, the gentry, and the peasantry, there are but three
in Norway--the nobility being utterly wanting. No aristocracy is
acknowledged, not even that of the office-holder, for in this favored
country where privileged persons are unknown, the office-holder
is only the humble servant of the public. In fact, perfect social
equality prevails without any political distinctions whatever.

Sylvius Hogg being one of the most influential men in the country, the
reader will not be surprised to learn that he was also a member of the
Storthing; and in this august body, by the well-known probity of his
public and private life even more than by his mighty intellect, he
wielded a powerful influence even over the peasant deputies elected in
such large numbers in the rural districts.

Ever since the adoption of the Constitution of 1814, it may be
truly said that Norway is a republic with the King of Sweden for
its president; for Norway, ever jealous of her rights, has carefully
guarded her individuality. The Storthing will have nothing whatever to
do with the Swedish parliament; hence it is only natural that the most
prominent and patriotic members of the Storthing should be regarded
with distrust on the other side of the imaginary frontier that
separates Sweden from Norway.

This was the case with Sylvius Hogg. Being extremely independent in
character, and utterly devoid of ambition, he had repeatedly declined
a position in the Cabinet; and a stanch defender of all the rights
of his native land, he had constantly and unflinchingly opposed any
threatened encroachment on the part of Sweden.

Such is the moral and political gulf between the two countries that
the King of Sweden--then Oscar XV.--after being crowned at Stockholm,
was obliged to go through a similar ceremony at Drontheim, the ancient
capital of Norway. Such too is the suspicious reserve of Norwegian men
of business, that the Bank of Christiania is unwilling to accept the
notes of the Bank of Stockholm! Such too is the clearly defined line
of demarkation between the two nations that the Swedish flag floats
neither over the public buildings of Norway, nor from the masts of
Norwegian vessels. The one has its blue bunting, bearing a yellow
cross; the other a blue cross upon a crimson ground.

Sylvius Hogg was a thorough Norwegian in heart and in soul, and
stoutly defended her rights upon all occasions; so, when in 1854 the
Storthing was discussing the question of having neither a viceroy
nor even a governor at the head of the state, he was one of the most
enthusiastic champions of the measure.

Consequently, though he was by no means popular in the eastern part of
Scandinavia, he was adored in the western part of it, even in the most
remote hamlets. His name was a household word throughout Norway from
the dunes of Christiansand to the bleak rocks of the North Cape, and
so worthy was he of this universal respect that no breath of calumny
had ever sullied the reputation of either the deputy or the professor.
But though he was a Norwegian to the core he was a hot-blooded man,
with none of the traditional coldness and apathy of his compatriots;
but much more prompt and resolute in his thoughts and acts than most
Scandinavians, as was proved by the quickness of his movements, the
ardor of his words, and the vivacity of his gestures. Had he been born
in France, one would have unhesitatingly pronounced him a Southerner.

Sylvius Hogg's fortune had never exceeded a fair competence, for
he had not entered into politics for the purpose of making money.
Naturally unselfish, he never thought of himself, but continually of
others; nor was he tormented by a thirst for fame. To be a deputy was
enough for him; he craved no further advancement.

Just at this time Sylvius Hogg was taking advantage of a three months'
vacation to recuperate after a year of severe legislative toil. He
had left Christiania six weeks before, with the intention of traveling
through the country about Drontheim, the Hardanger, the Telemark, and
the districts of Kongsberg and Drammen. He had long been anxious
to visit these provinces of which he knew nothing; and his trip
was consequently one of improvement and of pleasure. He had already
explored a part of the region, and it was on his return from the
northern districts that the idea of visiting the famous falls of the
Rjukan--one of the wonders of the Telemark--first occurred to him. So,
after surveying the route of the new railroad--which as yet existed
only on paper--between the towns of Drontheim and Christiania, he sent
for a guide to conduct him to Dal. He was to meet this guide on the
left bank of the Maan; but lured on by the beauties of the Maristien,
he ventured upon the dangerous pass without waiting for his guide. An
unusual want of prudence in a man like him and one that nearly cost
him his life, for had it not been for the timely assistance rendered
by Joel and Hulda Hansen, the journey would have ended with the
traveler himself in the grim depths of the Rjukanfos.




CHAPTER X.


The people of Scandinavia are very intelligent, not only the
inhabitants of the cities, but of the most remote rural districts.
Their education goes far beyond reading, writing, and arithmetic.
The peasant learns with avidity. His mental faculties are ever on the
alert. He takes a deep interest in the public welfare and no mean part
in all political and local affairs. More than half of the Storthing is
made up of members of this rank in life. Not unfrequently they attend
its sessions clad in the costume of their particular province; but
they are justly noted for their remarkable good sense, acute reasoning
powers, their clear though rather slow understanding, and above all,
for their incorruptibility.

Consequently it is not at all strange that the name of Sylvius Hogg
was a household word throughout Norway, and was uttered with respect
even in the wilds of the Telemark; so Dame Hansen on receiving such a
widely known and highly esteemed guest, thought it only proper to tell
him how highly honored she felt at having him under her roof, if only
for a few days.

"I don't know that I am doing you much honor, Dame Hansen," replied
Sylvius Hogg, "but I do know that it gives me great pleasure to be
here. I have heard my pupils talk of this hospitable inn for years.
Indeed, that is one reason I intended to stop here and rest for about
a week, but by Saint Olaf! I little expected to arrive here on one
leg!"

And the good man shook the hand of his hostess most cordially.

"Wouldn't you like my brother to fetch a doctor from Bamble?" inquired
Hulda.

"A doctor! my little Hulda! Why! do you want me to lose the use of
both my legs?"

"Oh, Mr. Sylvius!"

"A doctor! Why not send for my friend, the famous Doctor Bork, of
Christiania? All this ado about a mere scratch, what nonsense!"

"But even a mere scratch may become a very serious thing if not
properly attended to," remarked Joel.

"Well, Joel, will you tell me why you are so very anxious for this to
become serious?"

"Indeed, I am not, sir; God forbid!"

"Oh, well, He will preserve you and me, and all Dame Hansen's
household, especially if pretty little Hulda here will be kind enough
to give me some attention."

"Certainly, Mr. Sylvius."

"All right, my friends. I shall be as well as ever in four or five
days. How could a man help getting well in such a pretty room? Where
could one hope for better care than in this excellent inn? This
comfortable bed, with its mottoes, is worth a great deal more than
all the nauseous prescriptions of the faculty. And that quaint window
overlooking the valley of the Maan! And the stream's soft, musical
murmur that penetrates to the remotest corner of my cozy nest! And the
fragrant, healthful scent of the pines that fills the whole house! And
the air, this pure exhilarating mountain air! Ah! is not that the very
best of physicians? When one needs him one has only to open the window
and in he comes and makes you well without cutting off your rations."

He said all this so gayly that it seemed as if a ray of sunshine had
entered the house with him. At least, this was the impression of the
brother and sister, who stood listening to him, hand in hand.

All this occurred in a chamber on the first floor, to which the
professor had been conducted immediately upon his arrival; and now,
half reclining in a large arm-chair, with his injured limb resting
upon a stool, he gratefully accepted the kindly attentions of Joel
and Hulda. A careful bathing of the wound with cold water was the only
remedy he would use, and in fact no other was needed.

"Thanks, my friends, thanks!" he exclaimed, "this is far better than
drugs. And now do you know that but for your timely arrival upon the
scene of action, I should have become much too well acquainted with
the wonders of the Rjukanfos! I should have rolled down into the
abyss like a big stone, and have added another legend to those already
associated with the Maristien. And there was no excuse for me. My
betrothed was not waiting for me upon the opposite bank as in the case
of poor Eystein!"

"And what a terrible thing it would have been to Madame Hogg!"
exclaimed Hulda. "She would never have got over it."

"Madame Hogg!" repeated the professor. "Oh! Madame Hogg wouldn't have
shed a tear--"

"Oh, Mister Sylvius."

"No, I tell you, for the very good reason that there is no Madame
Hogg. Nor can I ever imagine what Madame Hogg would be like, stout or
thin, tall or short."

"She would, of course, be amiable, intelligent and good, being your
wife," replied Hulda, naïvely.

"Do you really think so, mademoiselle? Well, well, I believe you! I
believe you!"

"But on hearing of such a calamity, Mister Sylvius," remarked Joel,
"your relatives and many friends--"

"I have no relatives to speak of, but I have quite a number of
friends, not counting those I have just made in Dame Hansen's house,
and you have spared them the trouble of weeping for me. But tell me,
children, you can keep me here a few days, can you not?"

"As long as you please, Mister Sylvius," replied Hulda. "This room
belongs to you."

"You see, I intended to stop awhile at Dal as all tourists do, and
radiate from here all over the Telemark district; but now, whether I
shall radiate, or I shall not radiate, remains to be seen."

"Oh, you will be on your feet again before the end of the week, I
hope, Mister Sylvius," remarked Joel.

"So do I, my boy."

"And then I will escort you anywhere in the district that you care to
go."

"We'll see about that when Richard is himself again. I still have two
months leave before me, and even if I should be obliged to spend
the whole of it under Dame Hansen's roof I should have no cause
for complaint. Could I not explore that portion of the valley of
Vesfjorddal lying between the two lakes, make the ascent of Gousta,
and pay another visit to the Rjukanfos? for though I very narrowly
escaped falling head foremost into its depths I scarcely got a glimpse
of it, and am resolved to see it again."

"You shall do so, Mister Sylvius," replied Hulda.

"And we will visit it next time in company with good Dame Hansen
if she will be kind enough to go with us. And now I think of it, my
friends, I must drop a line to Kate, my old housekeeper, and Fink, my
faithful old servant in Christiania. They will be very uneasy if they
do not hear from me, and I shall get a terrible scolding. And now
I have a confession to make to you. The strawberries and milk were
delicious and extremely refreshing, but they scarcely satisfied my
hunger, and as I won't submit to being put upon short allowance may I
not ask if it is not nearly your dinner hour?"

"Oh! that makes no difference whatever, Mister Sylvius."

"On the contrary, it does make a great deal of difference. Do you
think that I am going to sit in solitary grandeur at the table, and in
my own room, all the time I stay at Dal? No, I want to take my meals
with you and your mother if Dame Hansen has no objections."

Of course Dame Hansen could but assent when she was apprised of the
professor's request, especially as it would be a great honor to her
and hers to have a member of the Storthing at her table.

"It is settled, then, that we are to eat together in the living room,"
remarked Sylvius Hogg.

"Yes, Mister Sylvius," replied Joel. "I shall only have to wheel you
out in your arm-chair when dinner is ready."

"Indeed, Mister Joel! Why don't you propose a kariol? No; with the aid
of a friendly arm, I shall be able to reach the table. I haven't had
my leg amputated yet, that I am aware of."

"As you please, Mister Sylvius," replied Hulda. "But don't be guilty
of any imprudence, I beg of you, or Joel will have to hurry off in
search of a doctor."

"More threats! Oh, well, I will be as prudent and docile as possible;
provided you do not put me on short allowance, you will find me the
most tractable of patient. Can it be that you are not hungry, my
friends?"

"Give us only a quarter of an hour," replied Hulda; "and we will set
before you a nice trout from the Maan, a grouse that Joel shot in the
Hardanger yesterday, and a bottle of French wine."

"Thank you, my dear child, thank you!"

Hulda left the room to superintend the dinner and set the table, while
Joel took the kariol back to Lengling's stable. Sylvius Hogg was left
alone, and his thoughts very naturally reverted to the honest family
whose guest and debtor he was. What could he do to repay Hulda and
Joel for the inestimable service they had rendered him?

He had not much time for reflection, however, for scarcely ten minutes
had elapsed before he was seated in the place of honor at the family
table. The dinner was excellent. It corresponded with the reputation
of the inn, and the professor ate very heartily.

The rest of the evening was spent in conversation in which Sylvius
Hogg took the leading part. As Dame Hanson found it well-nigh
impossible to overcome her habitual reserve, Joel and Hulda were
obliged to respond to their genial host's advances, and the sincere
liking the professor had taken to them from the very first naturally
increased.

When night came, he returned to his room with the assistance of Joel
and Hulda, gave and received a friendly good-night, and had scarcely
stretched himself out upon the big bed before he was sound asleep.

The next morning he woke with the sun, and began to review the
situation.

"I really don't know how I shall get out of the scrape," he said to
himself. "One can not allow one's self to be saved from death, nursed
and cured without any other return than a mere thank you. I am under
deep obligations to Hulda and Joel, that is undeniable; but the
services they have rendered me are not of a kind that can be repaid
with money. On the other hand, these worthy people appear to be
perfectly happy, and I can do nothing to add to their happiness!
Still, we shall probably have many talks together, and while we are
talking, perhaps--"

During the three or four days the professor was obliged to keep his
leg upon a stool he and the young Hansens had many pleasant chats
together, but unfortunately it was with some reserve on the brother's
and sister's part. Neither of them had much to say about their mother,
whose cold and preoccupied manner had not escaped Sylvius Hogg's
notice, and from a feeling of prudence they hesitated to reveal to
their guest the uneasiness excited by Ole Kamp's delay, for might they
not impair his good humor by telling him their troubles?

"And yet we perhaps make a great mistake in not confiding in Mister
Sylvius," Joel remarked to her sister, one day. "He is a very clever
man, and through his influential acquaintances he might perhaps be
able to find out whether the Naval Department is making any effort to
ascertain what has become of the 'Viking.'"

"You are right, Joel," replied Hulda. "I think we had better tell him
all; but let us wait until he has entirely recovered from his hurt."

"That will be very soon," rejoined Joel.

By the end of the week Sylvius Hogg was able to leave his room without
assistance, though he still limped a little; and he now began to spend
hours on the benches in front of the house, gazing at the snow-clad
summit of Gousta, while the Maan dashed merrily along at his feet.

People were continually passing over the road that led from Dal to the
Rjukanfos now. Most of them were tourists who stopped an hour or two
at Dame Hanson's inn either to breakfast or dine. There were also
students in plenty with knapsacks on their backs, and the little
Norwegian cockade in their caps.

Many of them knew the professor, so interminable greetings were
exchanged, and cordial salutations, which showed how much Sylvius Hogg
was loved by these young people.

"What, you here, Mister Sylvius?" they would exclaim.

"Yes, my friend."

"You, who are generally supposed to be in the remotest depths of the
Hardanger!"

"People are mistaken, then. It was in the remotest depths of the
Rjukanfos that I came very near staying."

"Very well, we shall tell everybody that you are in Dal."

"Yes, in Dal, with a game leg."

"Fortunately you are at Dame Hansen's inn, where you will have the
best of food and care."

"Could one imagine a more comfortable place?"

"Most assuredly not."

"Or better people?"

"There are none in the world," responded the young travelers merrily.

Then they would all drink to the health of Hulda and Joel, who were so
well known throughout the Telemark.

And then the professor would tell them all about his adventure,
frankly admitting his unpardonable imprudence, and telling how his
life had been saved, and how grateful he felt to his preservers.

"And I shall remain here until I have paid my debt," he would add. "My
course of lectures on legislation will not be resumed for a long time,
I fear, and you can enjoy an extended holiday."

"Good! good! Mister Sylvius," cried the light-hearted band. "Oh, you
can't fool us! It is pretty Hulda that keeps you here at Dal."

"A sweet girl she is, my friends, and as pretty as a picture, besides;
and by Saint Olaf! I'm only sixty."

"Here's to the health of Mister Sylvius!"

"And to yours, my dear boys. Roam about the country, gather wisdom,
and yet be merry. Life is all sunshine at your age. But keep away from
the Maristien. Joel and Hulda may not be on hand to rescue such of you
as are imprudent enough to venture there."

Then they would resume their journey, making the whole valley ring
with their joyful _God-aften_.

Once or twice Joel was obliged to act as guide to some tourists who
wished to make the ascent of Gousta. Sylvius Hogg was anxious to
accompany them. He declared that he was all right again. In fact, the
wound on his leg was nearly healed; but Hulda positively forbade him
to undertake a trip which would certainly prove too fatiguing for him,
and Hulda's word was law.

A wonderful mountain, though, is this Gousta, whose lofty summit
traversed by deep snow-covered ravines, rises out of a forest of pines
that form a thick green ruff about its snowy throat! And what a superb
view one enjoys from its summit. To the east lies the bailiwick of
Numedal; On the west, the Hardanger and its magnificent glaciers; down
at the base of the mountain, the winding valley of Vesfjorddal between
Lakes Tinn and Mjos, Dal, and its miniature houses, and the bright
waters of the Maan leaping and dancing merrily along through the
verdant meadows to the music of its own voice.

To make the ascent Joel was obliged to leave Dal at five o'clock in
the morning. He usually returned about six o'clock in the evening,
and Sylvius Hogg and Hulda always went to meet him. As soon as the
primitive ferry-boat landed the tourists and their guide a cordial
greeting ensued, and the three spent yet another pleasant evening
together. The professor still limped a little, but he did not
complain. Indeed, one might almost have fancied that he was in no
haste to be cured, or rather to leave Dame Hansen's hospitable roof.

The time certainly passed swiftly and pleasantly there. He had written
to Christiania that he should probably spend some time at Dal. The
story of his adventure at the Rjukanfos was known throughout the
country. The newspapers had got hold of it, and embellished the
account after their fashion, so a host of letters came to the inn, to
say nothing of pamphlets and newspapers. All these had to be read
and answered, and the names of Joel and Hulda which were necessarily
mentioned in the correspondence, soon became known throughout Norway.

Nevertheless, this sojourn at Dame Hansen's inn could not be prolonged
indefinitely, though Sylvius Hogg was still as much in doubt as ever,
in regard to the manner in which he should pay his debt of gratitude.
Of late, however, he had begun to suspect that this family was not
as happy as he had at first supposed. The impatience with which
the brother and sister awaited the arrival of the daily mail from
Christiania and Bergen, their disappointment and even chagrin on
finding no letters for them, all this was only too significant.

It was already the ninth of June, and still no news from the "Viking!"
The vessel was now more than a fortnight overdue, and not a single
line from Ole! No news to assuage Hulda's anxiety. The poor girl was
beginning to despair, and Sylvius Hogg saw that her eyes were red with
weeping when he met her in the morning.

"What can be the matter?" he said to himself, more than once. "They
seem to be concealing some misfortunes from me. Is it a family secret,
I wonder, with which a stranger can not be allowed to meddle? But do
they still regard me as a stranger? No. Still, they must think so; but
when I announce my departure they will perhaps understand that it is a
true friend who is about to leave them."

So that very day he remarked:

"My friends, the hour is fast approaching when, to my great regret, I
shall be obliged to bid you good-bye."

"So soon, Mister Sylvius, so soon?" exclaimed Joel, with a dismay he
could not conceal.

"The time has passed very quickly in your company, but it is now
seventeen days since I came to Dal."

"What! seventeen days!" repeated Hulda.

"Yes, my dear child, and the end of my vacation is approaching. I have
only a week at my disposal if I should extend my journey to Drammen
and Kongsberg. And though the Storthing is indebted to you for not
being obliged to elect another deputy in my place, the Storthing will
know no better how to compensate you than I do."

"Oh! Mister Sylvius," cried Hulda, placing her little hand upon his
lips to silence him.

"Oh, I understand, Hulda. That is a forbidden subject, at least here."

"Here and everywhere," replied the girl, gayly.

"So be it! I am not my own master, and I must obey. But you and Joel
must come and pay me a visit at Christiania."

"Pay you a visit?"

"Yes, pay me a visit; spend several weeks at my house in company with
your mother, of course."

"And if we should leave the inn who will attend to things in our
absence?" replied Joel.

"But your presence here is not necessary after the excursion season is
over, I imagine; so I have fully made up my mind to come for you late
in the autumn."

"It will be impossible, my dear Mister Sylvius, for us to accept--"

"On the contrary, it will be perfectly possible. Don't say no. I shall
not be content with such an answer. Besides, when I get you there
in the very best room in my house, in the care of my old Kate and
faithful Fink, you will be my own children, and then you can certainly
tell me what I can do for you."

"What you can do for us?" repeated Joel, with a glance at his sister.

"Brother!" exclaimed Hulda, as if divining his intention.

"Speak, my boy, speak!"

"Ah, well, Mister Sylvius, you can do us a great honor."

"How?"

"By consenting to be present at my sister Hulda's marriage, if it
would not inconvenience you too much."

"Hulda's marriage!" exclaimed Sylvius Hogg. "What! my little Hulda is
going to be married, and no one has said a word to me about it!"

"Oh, Mister Sylvius!" exclaimed the girl, her eyes filling with tears.

"And when is the marriage to take place?"

"As soon as it pleases God to bring her betrothed, Ole Kamp, back to
us," replied the girl.




CHAPTER XI.


Joel then proceeded to relate Ole Kamp's whole history. Sylvius Hogg,
deeply moved, listened to the recital with profound attention. He knew
all now. He even read Ole's letter announcing his speedy return. But
Ole had not returned, and there had been no tidings from the missing
one. What anxiety and anguish the whole Hansen family must have
suffered!

"And I thought myself an inmate of a happy home!" he said to himself.

Still, after a little reflection, it seemed to him that the brother
and sister were yielding to despair while there was still some room
for hope. By counting these May and June days over and over again
their imaginations had doubled the number, as it were.

The professor, therefore, concluded to give them his reasons for this
belief, not feigned, but really sensible and plausible reasons that
would also account for the delay of the "Viking."

Nevertheless his face had become very grave, for the poor girl's
evident grief touched him deeply.

"Listen to me, my children," said he. "Sit down here by me, and let us
talk the matter over calmly."

"Ah! what can you say to comfort us?" cried Hulda, whose heart was
full to overflowing.

"I shall tell you only what I really and truly think," replied the
professor. "I have been thinking over all that Joel just told me, and
it seems to me that you are more anxious and despondent than you have
any real cause to be. I would not arouse any false hopes, but we must
view matters as they really are."

"Alas! Mister Sylvius," replied Hulda, "my poor Ole has gone down with
the 'Viking,' and I shall never see him again!"

"Sister, sister!" exclaimed Joel, "be calm, I beseech you, and hear
what Mister Sylvius has to say."

"Yes, be calm, my children, and let us talk the matter over quietly.
It was between the fifteenth and twentieth of May that Ole expected to
return to Bergen, was it not?"

"Yes; and it is now the ninth of June."

"So the vessel is only twenty days overdue, if we reckon from the
latest date appointed for the return of the 'Viking.' That is enough
to excite anxiety, I admit; still, we must not expect the same
punctuality from a sailing-vessel as from a steamer."

"I have told Hulda that again and again, and I tell her so yet,"
interrupted Joel.

"And you are quite right, my boy. Besides, it is very possible
that the 'Viking' is an old vessel, and a slow sailer, like most
Newfoundland ships, especially when heavily laden. On the other hand,
we have had a great deal of bad weather during the past few weeks, and
very possibly the vessel did not sail at the date indicated in Ole's
letter. In that case a week's delay in sailing would be sufficient to
account for the non-arrival of the 'Viking' and for your failure to
receive a letter from your lover. What I say is the result of serious
reflection. Besides, how do you know but the instructions given to the
captain of the 'Viking' authorize him to take his cargo to some other
port, according to the state of the market?"

"In that case, Ole would have written," replied Hulda, who could not
even be cheered by this hope.

"What is there to prove that he did not write?" retorted the
professor. "If he did, it is not the 'Viking' that is behind time, but
the American mail. Suppose, for instance, that Ole's ship touched at
some port in the United States, that would explain why none of his
letters have yet reached Europe."

"The United States, Mister Sylvius!"

"That sometimes happens, and it is only necessary to miss one mail
to leave one's friends without news for a long time. There is, at all
events, one very easy thing for us to do; that is to make inquiries of
some of the Bergen shipowners. Are you acquainted with any of them?"

"Yes," replied Joel, "Messrs. Help Bros."

"Help Bros., the sons of old Help?"

"Yes."

"Why, I know them, too; at least, the younger brother, Help, Junior,
they call him, though he is not far from my own age, and one of my
particular friends. He has often dined with me in Christiania. Ah,
well, my children, I can soon learn through him all that can be
ascertained about the 'Viking.' I'll write him this very day, and if
need be I'll go and see him."

"How kind you are, Mister Sylvius!" cried Hulda and Joel in the same
breath.

"No thanks, if you please; I won't allow them. Did I ever thank you
for what you did for me up there? And now I find an opportunity to do
you a good turn, and here you are all in a flutter."

"But you were just talking of returning to Christiania," remarked
Joel.

"Well, I shall go to Bergen instead, if I find it necessary to go to
Bergen."

"But you were about to leave us, Mister Sylvius," said Hulda.

"Well, I have changed my mind, that is all. I am master of my own
actions, I suppose; and I sha'n't go until I see you safely out
of this trouble, that is, unless you are disposed to turn me
out-of-doors--"

"What can you be thinking of, Mister Sylvius?"

"I have decided to remain in Dal until Ole's return. I want to make
the acquaintance of my little Hulda's betrothed. He must be a brave,
honest fellow, of Joel's stamp, I am inclined to think."

"Yes, exactly like him," replied Hulda.

"I was sure of it!" exclaimed the professor, whose cheerfulness had
returned, at least apparently.

"Ole is Ole, Mister Sylvius," said Joel, "and that is equivalent to
saying that he is the best-hearted fellow in the world."

"I believe you, my dear Joel, and what you say only makes me the more
anxious to see him. I sha'n't have to wait long. Something tells me
that the 'Viking' will soon come safely into port."

"God grant it!"

"And why should He not hear your prayer? Yes, I shall certainly attend
Hulda's wedding, as you have been kind enough to invite me to it. The
Storthing will have to do without me a few weeks longer, that is all.
It would have been obliged to grant me a much longer leave of absence
if you had let me fall into the Rjukanfos as I deserved."

"How kind it is in you to say this, Mister Sylvius, and how happy you
make us!"

"Not as happy as I could wish, my friends, as I owe my life to you,
and I don't know--"

"Oh! please, please say no more about that trifle."

"Yes, I shall. Come now, who drew me out of the frightful jaws of the
Maristien? Who risked their own lives to save me? Who brought me to
the inn at Dal, and cared for me, and nursed me without any assistance
from the Faculty? Oh! I am as stubborn as an old cart-horse, I assure
you, and I have made up my mind to attend the marriage of Hulda to Ole
Kamp, and attend it I shall!"

Hopefulness is contagious, and how could any one resist such
confidence as Sylvius Hogg displayed? A faint smile crept over poor
Hulda's face. She longed to believe him; she only asked to hope.

"But we must recollect that the days are passing very rapidly,"
continued Sylvius Hogg, "and that it is high time we began our
preparations for the wedding."

"They are already begun, Mister Sylvius," replied Hulda. "In fact,
they were begun more than three weeks ago."

"So much the better; but in that case, we must take good care not to
allow anything to interrupt them."

"Interrupt them!" repeated Joel. "Why, everything is in readiness."

"What, the wedding-dress, the bodice with its silver clasps, the belt
and its pendants?"

"Even the pendants."

"And the radiant crown that will make you look like a saint, my little
Hulda?"

"Yes"

"And the invitations are written?"

"All written," replied Joel, "even the one to which we attach most
importance, yours."

"And the bride-maid has been chosen from among the sweetest maidens of
the Telemark?"

"And the fairest, Mister Sylvius," added Joel, "for it is Mademoiselle
Siegfrid of Bamble."

"From the tone in which he uttered those words, and the way in which
he blushed as he uttered them, I judge that Mademoiselle Siegfrid
Helmboe is destined to become Madame Joel Hansen of Dal," said the
professor, laughing.

"Yes, Mr. Sylvius," replied Hulda.

"Good! so there is a fair prospect of yet another wedding," exclaimed
Sylvius Hogg. "And as I feel sure that I shall be honored with an
invitation, I can do no less than accept it here and now. It certainly
looks as if I should be obliged to resign my seat in the Storthing,
for I really don't see how I am to find time to attend its sessions.
But never mind, I will be your best man, Joel, after first serving in
that capacity at your sister's wedding. You certainly are making me do
just what you like, or rather what I like. Kiss me, little Hulda! Give
me your hand, my boy, and now let me write to my friend Help, Junior,
of Bergen."

The brother and sister left the apartment of which the professor had
threatened to take permanent possession, and returned to their daily
tasks with rather more hopeful hearts.

Sylvius Hogg was left alone.

"Poor child! poor child!" he murmured. "Yes, I have made her forget
her sorrow for a few moments. But the delay has been a long one; and
the sea is very rough at this season of the year. What if the 'Viking'
has indeed gone down, and Ole should never return!"

A moment afterward the professor was busily engaged in writing to his
Bergen friend. He asked for the fullest possible particulars in regard
to everything connected with the "Viking" and her cruise, and inquired
if some event, unforeseen or otherwise, had made it necessary to send
the vessel to a different port from that for which it was originally
destined. He also expressed a strong desire to hear as soon as
possible how the shipping merchants and sailors of Bergen explained
the delay. In short, he begged his friend Help to give him all
possible information in regard to the matter by return mail.

This urgent letter also explained Sylvius Hogg's interest in the mate
of the "Viking," the invaluable service rendered him by the young
man's betrothed, and the pleasure it would afford him to be able to
give some encouragement to Dame Hansen's children.

As soon as this letter was finished Joel took it to Moel so it would
go on the following day. It would reach Bergen on the eleventh, so a
reply to it ought to be received on the evening of the twelfth or the
morning of the thirteenth at the very latest.

Nearly three days of dreary waiting! How interminable they seemed!
Still, by dint of reassuring words and encouraging arguments, the
professor contrived to alleviate the painful suspense. Now he knew
Hulda's secret, was there not a topic of conversation ever ready? And
what a consolation it was to Joel and his sister to be able to talk of
the absent one!

"I am one of the family now," Sylvius Hogg repeated again and again.
"Yes, I am like an uncle that has just arrived from America or some
foreign land."

And as he was one of the family, they must have no more secrets from
him.

Of course he had not failed to notice the children's constrained
manner toward their mother, and he felt satisfied that the reserve the
parent displayed had its origin in something besides the uneasiness
she felt on Ole Kamp's account. He thought he might venture to
question Joel; but the latter was unable to give any satisfactory
reply. The professor than ventured to sound Dame Hansen on the
subject, but she was so uncommunicative that he was obliged to abandon
all hope of obtaining any knowledge of her secret until some future
day.

As Sylvius Hogg had predicted, the letter from Help, Junior, reached
Dal on the morning of the thirteenth. Joel started out before daylight
to meet the postman, and it was he who brought the letter into the
large hall where the professor was sitting with Dame Hansen and her
daughter.

There was a moment's silence. Hulda, who was as pale as death, was
unable to utter a word so violent was the throbbing of her heart, but
she seized the hand of her brother, who was equally agitated, and held
it tightly.

Sylvius Hogg opened the letter and read it aloud.

To his great regret the missive contained only some very
vague information; and the professor was unable to conceal his
disappointment from the young people who listened to the letter with
tears in their eyes.

The "Viking" had left Saint-Pierre-Miquelon on the date mentioned in
Ole Kamp's last letter. This fact had been established by the reports
received from other vessels which had reached Bergen since the
"Viking's" departure from Newfoundland. These vessels had seen nothing
of the missing ship on their homeward voyage, but they had encountered
very bad weather in the neighborhood of Iceland. Still they had
managed to weather the gales; so it was possible that the "Viking" had
been equally fortunate, and had merely been delayed somewhere, or had
put into some port for repairs. The "Viking" was a stanch craft, very
substantially built, and commanded by Captain Frikel, of Hammersfest,
a thoroughly competent officer. Still, this delay was alarming, and if
it continued much longer there would be good reason to fear that the
"Viking" had gone down with all on board.

The writer regretted that he had no better news to give the young
Hansens, and spoke of Ole Kamp in the most complimentary terms.
He concluded his letter by assuring the professor of his sincere
friendship, and that of his family, and by promising to send him
without delay any intelligence that might be received at any Norwegian
port, in relation to the "Viking."

Poor Hulda sunk half fainting into a chair while Sylvius Hogg was
reading this letter, and she was sobbing violently when he concluded
its perusal.

Joel, with his arms folded tightly upon his breast, listened in
silence, without daring to glance at his sister.

Dame Hansen, as soon as the reading was concluded, went up to her
room. She seemed to have been expecting the blow.

The professor beckoned Hulda and her brother to his side. He wanted to
talk with them calmly and sensibly on the subject, and he expressed a
confidence that was singular, to say the least, after Help, Junior's
letter. They had no reason to despair. Were there not countless
examples of protracted delays while navigating the seas that lie
between Norway and Newfoundland? Yes, unquestionably. And was not the
"Viking" a strong craft, well officered, and manned by an excellent
crew, and consequently in a much better condition than many of the
vessels that had come safely into port? Most assuredly.

"So let us continue to hope," he added, "and wait. If the 'Viking'
had been wrecked between Iceland and Newfoundland the numerous vessels
that follow the same route to reach Europe would certainly have seen
some trace of the disaster. But no, not a single floating plank
or spar did they meet on the whole of this route, which is so much
frequented at the conclusion of the fishing season. Still, we must
take measures to secure information of a more positive nature. If we
receive no further news of the 'Viking' during the coming week, nor
any letter from Ole, I shall return to Christiania and ask the Naval
Department to make careful inquiries, and I feel sure that the result
will prove eminently satisfactory to all concerned."

In spite of the hopeful manner assumed by the professor, Joel and
Hulda both felt that he did not speak as confidently as he had spoken
before the receipt of the letter from Bergen--a letter whose contents
gave them little if any grounds for hope. In fact, Sylvius Hogg no
longer dared to venture any allusion to the approaching marriage of
Hulda and Ole Kamp, though he said to himself again and again:

"No, no, it is impossible! Ole Kamp never cross the threshold of Dame
Hansen's house again? Ole not marry Hulda? Nothing will ever make me
believe such a misfortune possible."

He was perfectly sincere in this conviction. It was due to the energy
of his character, to a spirit of hopefulness that nothing could crush.
But how could he hope to convince others, especially those whom the
fate of the "Viking" affected so directly?

A few days were allowed to elapse. Sylvius Hogg, who was now entirely
well, took a long walk every day, and persuaded Hulda and her brother
to accompany him. One day all three of them went up the valley of
Vesfjorddal half-way to the falls of the Rjukan. The next day they
went to Moel and Lake Tinn. Once they were even absent twenty-four
hours. This time they prolonged their excursion to Bamble, where the
professor made the acquaintance of Farmer Helmboe and his daughter
Siegfrid. What a cordial welcome the latter gave to her friend Hulda,
and what words of tenderness she found to console her!

Here, too, Sylvius Hogg did all in his power to encourage these worthy
people. He had written to the Navy Department, and the government was
investigating the matter. Ole would certainly return at no distant
day. He might drop in upon them, indeed, at any moment. No; the
wedding would not have to be postponed more than six weeks! The good
man seemed so thoroughly convinced of all this, that his auditors were
influenced rather by his firm conviction than by his arguments.

This visit to the Helmboe family did the young Hansens good, and they
returned home much calmer than they went away.

At last the fifteenth of June came. The "Viking" was now exactly one
month overdue; and as the distance from Newfoundland to the coast of
Norway is comparatively short, this delay was beyond all reason, even
for a sailing-vessel.

Hulda seemed to have abandoned all hope; and her brother could not
find a single word to say by way of encouragement. In the presence
of these poor, unhappy creatures, the professor realized the utter
futility of any well-meant attempt at consolation. Hulda and Joel
crossed the threshold only to stand and gaze in the direction of Moel,
or to walk up the road leading to Rjukanfos. Ole Kamp would probably
come by the way of Bergen, but he might come by way of Christiania
if the destination of the "Viking" had been changed. The sound of an
approaching kariol, a hasty cry, the form of a man suddenly rounding
a curve in the road made their hearts beat wildly; but all for naught.
The good people of Dal were also eagerly watching. Not unfrequently
they went half-way to meet the postman. Everybody was deeply
interested, for the Hansen family was exceedingly popular in the
neighborhood; and poor Ole was almost a child of the Telemark. But no
letter came from Bergen or Christiania giving news of the absent one.

Nothing new occurred on the sixteenth. Sylvius Hogg could scarcely
restrain his restlessness. He began to understand that he must proceed
to act in person, so he announced to his friends that if no news was
received on the following day he should go to Christiania and satisfy
himself that nothing had been left undone. Of course, it was hard
for him to leave Hulda and Joel, but there was no help for it; and he
would return as soon as his task was accomplished.

On the seventeenth a greater part of the most wretched day they had
ever spent together passed without bringing any new developments. It
had rained incessantly since early morning; the wind was blowing a
gale, and the rain dashed fiercely against the window on the side of
the house nearest the Maan.

Seven o'clock came. They had just finished dinner, which had been
eaten in profound silence, as if in a house of mourning. Even Sylvius
Hogg had been unable to keep up the conversation. What could he say
that he had not already said a hundred times before?

"I shall start for Christiania to-morrow morning," he remarked at
last. "Joel, I wish you would procure a kariol and drive me to Moel."

"Very well, Mr. Sylvius. But wouldn't you like me to accompany you
further?"

The professor shook his head, with a meaning glance at Hulda, for he
did not want to see her separated from her brother.

Just then a sound, which was as yet scarcely audible, was heard on the
road in the direction of Moel. They all listened breathlessly. Soon
all doubts vanished. It was the sound of an approaching kariol coming
swiftly toward Dal. Was the occupant some traveler who intended to
spend the night at the inn? This was scarcely probable, as tourists
rarely arrived at so late an hour.

Hulda sprung up trembling in every limb. Joel went to the door, opened
it and looked out.

The noise grew louder It was certain the clatter of horse's hoofs
blended with, the roll of kariol wheels; but the storm without was so
violent that Joel was obliged to close the door.

Sylvius Hogg tramped up and down the room in a perfect fever of
impatience. Joel and his sister held each other tightly by the hand.

The kariol could not be more than twenty yards from the house now.
Would it pause or go by?

The hearts of all three throbbed to suffocation.

The kariol stopped. They heard a voice calling; but it was not the
voice of Ole Kamp!

Almost immediately some one rapped at the door.

Joel opened it.

A man stood upon the threshold.

"Is Mr. Sylvius Hogg here?" he asked.

"I am he," replied the professor. "Who are you, my friend?"

"A messenger sent to you by the Secretary of the Navy at Christiania."

"Have you a letter for me?"

"Yes, sir; here it is."

And the messenger handed him a large envelope sealed with the
Government seal.

Hulda's limbs tottered under her, and her brother sprung forward and
placed her in a chair. Neither of them dared to ask Sylvius Hogg to
open the letter.

At last he broke the seal and read the following:

"MR. PROFESSOR,--In reply to your last letter, I inclose a paper
picked up at sea on the 3d instant by a Danish vessel. Unfortunately
this discovery dispels any lingering doubt as to the fate of the
'Viking'--"

Sylvius Hogg, without taking time to read the rest of the letter, drew
the paper from the envelope. He looked at it; he turned it over.

It was a lottery ticket bearing the number 9672.

On the other side of the ticket were the following lines:

"May 3d.

"DEAREST HULDA,--The 'Viking' is going down. I have only this ticket
left of all I hoped to bring back to you. I intrust it to God's hands,
hoping that it may reach you safely; and as I shall not be there, I
beseech you to be present at the drawing. Accept the ticket with
my last thought of you. Hulda, do not forget me in your prayers.
Farewell, my beloved, farewell!

"OLE KAMP."




CHAPTER XII.


So this was the young man's secret! This was the source from which he
expected to derive a fortune for his promised bride--a lottery ticket,
purchased before his departure. And as the "Viking" was going down,
he inclosed the ticket in a bottle and threw it into the sea with the
last farewell for Hulda.

This time Sylvius Hogg was completely disconcerted. He looked at the
letter, then at the ticket. He was speechless with dismay. Besides,
what could he say? How could any one doubt that the "Viking" had gone
down with all on board?

While Sylvius Hogg was reading the letter Hulda had nerved herself to
listen, but after the concluding words had been read, she fell back
unconscious in Joel's arms, and it became necessary to carry her to
her own little chamber, where her mother administered restoratives.
After she recovered consciousness she asked to be left alone for
awhile, and she was now kneeling by her bedside, praying for Ole
Kamp's soul.

Dame Hansen returned to the hall. At first she started toward the
professor, as if with the intention of speaking to him, then suddenly
turning toward the staircase, she disappeared.

Joel, on returning from his sister's room, had hastily left the house.
He experienced a feeling of suffocation in the dwelling over which
such a dense cloud of misfortune seemed to be hanging. He longed for
the outer air, the fierce blast of the tempest, and spent a part of
the night in wandering aimlessly up and down the banks of the Maan.

Sylvius Hogg was therefore left alone. Stunned by the stroke at first,
he soon recovered his wonted energy. After tramping up and down the
hall two or three times, he paused and listened, in the hope that he
might hear a summons from the young girl, but disappointed in this,
he finally seated himself at the table, and abandoned himself to his
thoughts.

"Can it be possible that Hulda is never to see her betrothed
again?" he said to himself. "No; such a misfortune is inconceivable.
Everything that is within me revolts at the thought! Even admitting
that the 'Viking' has gone to the bottom of the ocean, what conclusive
proof have we of Ole's death? I can not believe it. In all cases of
shipwreck time alone can determine whether or not any one has survived
the catastrophe. Yes; I still have my doubts, and I shall continue
to have them, even if Hulda and Joel refuse to share them. If the
'Viking' really foundered, how does it happen that no floating
fragments of the wreck have been seen at sea--at least nothing except
the bottle in which poor Ole placed his last message, and with it all
he had left in the world."

Sylvius Hogg had the ticket still in his hand, and again he looked
at it, and turned it over and held it up between him and the waning
light--this scrap of paper upon which poor Ole had based his hopes of
fortune.

But the professor, wishing to examine it still more carefully, rose,
listened again to satisfy himself that the poor girl upstairs was not
calling her mother or brother, and then entered his room.

The ticket proved to be a ticket in the Christiania Schools Lottery--a
very popular lottery in Norway at that time. The capital prize was one
hundred thousand marks; the total value of the other prizes, ninety
thousand marks, and the number of tickets issued, one million, all of
which had been sold.

Ole Kamp's ticket bore the number 9672; but whether this number proved
lucky or unlucky, whether the young sailor had any secret reason for
his confidence in it or not, he would not be present at the drawing,
which was to take place on the fifteenth of July, that is to say, in
twenty-eight days; but it was his last request that Hulda should take
his place on that occasion.

By the light of his candle, Sylvius Hogg carefully reread the
lines written upon the back of the ticket, as if with the hope of
discovering some hidden meaning.

The lines had been written with ink, and it was evident that Ole's
hand had not trembled while tracing them. This showed that the mate
of the 'Viking' retained all his presence of mind at the time of
the shipwreck, and that he was consequently in a condition to take
advantage of any means of escape that might offer, such as a floating
spar or plank, in case the raging waters had not swallowed up
everything when the vessel foundered.

Very often writings of this kind that are recovered from the sea state
the locality in which the catastrophe occurred; but in this neither
the latitude nor longitude were mentioned; nor was there anything
to indicate the nearest land. Hence one must conclude that no one on
board knew where the "Viking" was at the time of the disaster. Driven
on, doubtless, by a tempest of resistless power, the vessel must have
been carried far out of her course, and the clouded sky making a
solar observation impossible, there had been no way of determining the
ship's whereabouts for several days; so it was more than probable that
no one would ever know whether it was near the shores of North America
or of Iceland that the gallant crew had sunk to rise no more.

This was a circumstance calculated to destroy all hope, even in the
bosoms of the most sanguine.

With some clew, no matter how vague, a search for the missing vessel
would have been possible. A ship or steamer could be dispatched to the
scene of the catastrophe and perhaps find some trace of it. Besides,
was it not quite possible that one or more survivors had succeeded in
reaching some point on the shores of the Arctic continent, and that
they were still there, homeless, and destitute, and hopelessly exiled
from their native land?

Such was the theory that gradually assumed shape in Sylvius Hogg's
mind--a theory that it would scarcely do to advance to Joel and Hulda,
so painful would the disappointment prove if it should be without
foundation.

"And though the writing gives no clew to the scene of the
catastrophe," he said to himself, "we at least know where the bottle
was picked up. This letter does not state, but they must know at the
Naval Department; and is it not an indication that might be used
to advantage? By studying the direction of the currents and of
the prevailing winds at the time of the shipwreck might it not be
possible? I am certainly going to write again. Search must be made, no
matter how small the chances of success. No; I will never desert poor
Hulda! And until I have positive proofs of it I will never credit the
death of her betrothed."

Sylvius Hogg reasoned thus; but at the same time he resolved to say
nothing about the measures he intended to adopt, or the search he
intended to urge on with all his influence. Hulda and her brother must
know nothing about his writing to Christiania; moreover, he resolved
to postpone indefinitely the departure which had been announced for
the next day, or rather he would leave in a few days, but only for a
trip to Bergen. There, he could learn from the Messrs. Help all the
particulars concerning the "Viking," ask the opinion of the most
experienced mariners, and decide upon the way in which search could
best be made.

In the meantime, from information furnished by the Navy Department,
the press of Christiania, then that of Norway, Sweden, and finally
all Europe, gradually got hold of this story of a lottery ticket
transformed into an important legal document. There was something very
touching about this gift from a shipwrecked mariner to his betrothed.

The oldest of the Norwegian journals, the "Morgen-Blad," was the
first to relate the story of the "Viking" and Ole Kamp; and of the
thirty-seven other papers published in that country at the time,
not one failed to allude to it in touching terms. The illustrated
"Nyhedsblad" published an ideal picture of the shipwreck. There
was the sinking "Viking," with tattered sails and hull partially
destroyed, about to disappear beneath the waves. Ole stood in the bow
throwing the bottle containing his last message into the sea, at the
same time commending his soul to God. In a luminous cloud in the dim
distance a wave deposited the bottle at the feet of his betrothed. The
whole picture was upon an enlarged representation of a lottery ticket
bearing the number 9672 in bold relief. An unpretending conception,
unquestionably, but one that could hardly fail to be regarded as a
masterpiece in the land which still clings to legends of the Undines
and Valkyries. Then the story was republished and commented upon in
France and England, and even in the United States. The story of Hulda
and Ole became familiar to every one through the medium of pencil and
pen. This young Norwegian girl, without knowing it, held a prominent
place in the sympathy and esteem of the public. The poor child little
suspected the interest she had aroused, however; besides, nothing
could have diverted her mind from the loss that engrossed her every
thought.

This being the case, no one will be surprised at the effect produced
upon both continents--an effect easily explained when we remember how
prone we all are to superstition. A lottery ticket so providentially
rescued from the waves could hardly fail to be the winning ticket. Was
it not miraculously designated as the winner of the capital prize? Was
it not worth a fortune--the fortune upon which Ole Kamp had counted?

Consequently it is not surprising that overtures for the purchase of
this ticket came from all parts of the country. At first, the prices
offered were small, but they increased from day to day; and it was
evident that they would continue to increase in proportion as the day
of the drawing approached.

These offers came not only from different parts of Scandinavia, which
is a firm believer in the active intervention of supernatural powers
in all mundane matters--but also from foreign lands, and even from
France.

Even the phlegmatic English grew excited over the matter, and
subsequently the Americans, who are not prone to spend their money so
unpractically. A host of letters came to Dal, and the newspapers
did not fail to make mention of the large sums offered to the
Hansen family. A sort of minor stock exchange seemed to have been
established, in which values were constantly changing, but always for
the better.

Several hundred marks were, in fact, offered for this ticket, which
had only one chance in a million of winning the capital prize. This
was absurd, unquestionably, but superstitious people do not stop to
reason; and as their imaginations became more and more excited, they
were likely to bid much higher.

This proved to be the case. One week after the event the papers
announced that the amounts offered for the ticket exceeded one
thousand, fifteen hundred and even two thousand marks. A resident of
Manchester, England, had even offered one hundred pounds sterling, or
two thousand five hundred marks; while an American, and a Bostonian
at that, announced his willingness to give one thousand dollars for
ticket No. 9672 of the Christiania Schools Lottery.

It is needless to say that Hulda troubled herself very little about
the matter that was exciting the public to such an extent. She would
not even read the letters that were addressed to her on the subject;
but the professor insisted that she must not be left in ignorance of
these offers, as Ole Kamp had bequeathed his right and title in this
ticket to her.

Hulda refused all these offers. This ticket was the last letter of her
betrothed.

No one need suppose that this refusal was due to an expectation that
the ticket would win one of the prizes in the lottery. No. She saw
in it only the last farewell of her shipwrecked lover--a memento she
wished to reverently preserve. She cared nothing for a fortune that
Ole could not share with her. What could be more touching than this
worship of a souvenir?

On apprising her of these different offers, however, neither Sylvius
Hogg nor Joel made any attempt to influence Hulda. She was to be
guided entirely by her own wishes in the matter. They knew now what
her wishes were.

Joel, moreover, approved his sister's decision unreservedly. Ole
Kamp's ticket must not be sold to any person at any price.

Sylvius Hogg went even further. He not only approved Hulda's decision,
but he congratulated her upon it. Think of seeing this ticket sold
and resold, passing from hand to hand, transformed, as it were, into
a piece of merchandise, until the time appointed for the drawing
arrived, when it would very probably become a worthless scrap of
paper?

And Sylvius Hogg went even further. Was it, perhaps, because he was
slightly superstitious? No. Still, if Ole Kamp had been there, the
professor would probably have said to him:

"Keep your ticket, my boy, keep it! First, your ticket, and then you,
yourself, were saved from the wreck. You had better wait and see what
will come of it. One never knows; no, one never knows!"

And when Sylvius Hogg, professor of law, and; a member of the
Storthing, felt in this way, one can hardly wonder at the infatuation
of the public, nor that No. 9672 could be sold at an enormous premium.

So in Dame Hansen's household there was no one who protested against
the young girl's decision--at least no one except the mother.

She was often heard to censure it, especially in Hulda's absence, a
fact that caused poor Joel not a little mortification and chagrin, for
he was very much afraid that she would not always confine herself to
covert censure, and that she would urge Hulda to accept one of the
offers she had received.

"Five thousand marks for the ticket!" she repeated again and again.
"They offer five thousand marks for it!"

It was evident that Dame Hansen saw nothing either pathetic or
commendable in her daughter's refusal. She was thinking only of this
large sum of five thousand marks. A single word from Hulda would bring
it into the family. She had no faith either in the extraordinary
value of the ticket, Norwegian though she was; and to sacrifice fire
thousand marks for a millionth chance of winning one hundred thousand
was an idea too absurd to be entertained far a moment by her cool and
practical mind.

All superstition aside, it is undeniable that the sacrifice of a
certainty, under such conditions, was not an act of worldly wisdom;
but as we said before, the ticket was not a lottery ticket in Hulda's
eyes; it was Ole's last farewell, and it would have broken her heart
to part with it.

Nevertheless, Dame Hansen certainly disapproved her daughter's
resolve. It was evident, too, that her dissatisfaction was constantly
increasing, and it seemed more than likely that at no very distant day
she would endeavor to make Hulda change her decision. Indeed, she had
already intimated as much to Joel, who had promptly taken his sister's
part.

Sylvius Hogg was, of course, kept informed of what was going on. Such
an attempt on the mother's part would only be another trial added to
those Hulda was already obliged to endure, and he was anxious to avert
it if possible. Joel mentioned the subject to him sometimes.

"Isn't my sister right in refusing?" he asked. "And am I not justified
in upholding her in her refusal?"

"Unquestionably," replied Sylvius Hogg. "And yet, from a mathematical
point of view, your mother is a million times right. But the science
of mathematics does not govern everything in this world. Calculation
has nothing to do with the promptings of the heart."

During the next two weeks they were obliged to watch Hulda very
closely, for the state of her health was such as to excite serious
anxiety. Fortunately loving care and attention were not wanting. At
Sylvius Hogg's request, the celebrated Dr. Bock, a personal friend,
came to Dal to see the young invalid. He could only prescribe rest,
and quiet of soul, if that were possible; but the only sure means of
curing her was Ole's return, and this means God only could provide.
Still, Sylvius Hogg was untiring in his efforts to console the young
girl. His words were ever words of hope, and strange as it may appear,
Sylvius Hogg did not despair.

Thirteen days had now elapsed since the arrival of the ticket
forwarded by the Navy Department. It was now the thirteenth of June.
A fortnight more, and the drawing of the lottery would take place with
great pomp in the main hall of the University of Christiania.

On the morning of the thirtieth day of June Sylvius Hogg received
another letter from the Navy Department. This letter advised him to
confer with the maritime authorities of Bergen, and authorized him to
immediately organize an expedition to search for the missing "Viking."

The professor did not want Joel or Hulda to know what he intended to
do, so he merely told them that he must leave them for a few days to
attend to some business matters.

"Pray do not desert us, Mister Sylvius," said the poor girl.

"Desert you--you, whom I regard as my own children!" replied Sylvius
Hogg.

Joel offered to accompany him, but not wishing him to know that he was
going to Bergen, the professor would only allow him to go as far as
Moel. Besides, it would not do for Hulda to be left alone with her
mother. After being confined to her bed several days, she was now
beginning to sit up a little, though she was still very weak and not
able to leave her room.

At eleven o'clock the kariol was at the door of the inn, and after
bidding Hulda good-bye, the professor took his seat in the vehicle
beside Joel. In another minute they had both disappeared behind a
large clump of birches at the turn in the road.

That same evening Joel returned to Dal.


END OF FIRST HALF.




CHAPTER XIII.


Meanwhile, Sylvius Hogg was hastening toward Bergen. His tenacious
nature and energetic character, though daunted for a moment, were now
reasserting themselves. He refused to credit Ole's death, nor would
he admit that Hulda was doomed never to see her lover again. No, until
the fact was established beyond a doubt, he was determined to regard
the report as false.

But had he any information which would serve as a basis for the task
he was about to undertake in Bergen? Yes, though we must admit that
the clew was of a very vague nature.

He knew merely the date on which the bottle had been cast into the sea
by Ole Kamp, and the date and locality in which it had been recovered
from the waves. He had learned those facts through the letter just
received from the Naval Department, the letter which had decided him
to leave for Bergen immediately, in order that he might consult with
Help Bros., and with the most experienced seamen of that port.

The journey was made as quickly as possible. On reaching Moel, Sylvius
Hogg sent his companion back with the kariol, and took passage upon
one of the birch-bark canoes that are used in traversing the waters of
Lake Finn. Then, at Tinoset, instead of turning his steps toward the
south--that is to say, in the direction of Bamble--he hired another
kariol, and took the Hardanger route, in order to reach the gulf of
that name in the shortest possible time. From there, a little steamer
called the "Run" transported him to the mouth of the gulf, and
finally, after crossing a network of fiords and inlets, between the
islands and islets that stud the Norwegian coast, he landed at Bergen
on the morning of the second of July.

This old city, laved by the waters of both the Logne and Hardanger,
is delightfully situated in a picturesque region which would bear a
striking resemblance to Switzerland if an artificial arm of the sea
should ever conduct the waters of the blue Mediterranean to the foot
of the Alps.

A magnificent avenue of ash trees leads to the town.

The houses, with their fantastic, pointed gables, are as dazzling
in their whiteness as the habitations of Arabian cities, and are all
congregated in an irregular triangle that contains a population
of about thirty thousand souls. Its churches date from the twelfth
century. Its tall cathedral is visible from afar to vessels returning
from sea, and it is the capital of commercial Norway, though
situated off the regular lines of travel, and a long distance
from the two cities which rank first and second in the kingdom,
politically--Christiania and Drontheim.

Under any other circumstances the professor would have taken great
pleasure in studying this important city, which is Dutch rather than
Norwegian in its aspect and manners. It had been one of the cities
included in his original route, but since his adventure on the
Maristien and his subsequent sojourn at Dal, his plans had undergone
important changes.

Sylvius Hogg was no longer the traveling deputy, anxious to ascertain
the exact condition of the country from a commercial as well as a
political point of view. He was the guest of the Hansens, the debtor
of Joel and Hulda, whose interests now outweighed all else in his
estimation--a debtor who was resolved to pay his debt of gratitude at
any cost, though he felt that what he was about to attempt for them
was but a trifle.

On his arrival in Bergen, Sylvius Hogg landed at the lower end of
the town, on the wharf used as a fish-market, but he lost no time in
repairing to the part of the town known as the Tyske Bodrone quarter,
where Help, Junior, of the house of Help Bros., resided.

It was raining, of course, for rain falls in Bergen on at least three
hundred and sixty days of every year; but it would be impossible
to find a house better protected against the wind and rain than the
hospitable mansion of Help, Junior, and nowhere could Sylvius Hogg
have received a warmer and more cordial welcome. His friend took
possession of him very much as if he had been some precious bale of
merchandise which had been consigned to his care, and which would be
delivered up only upon the presentation of a formal order.

Sylvius Hogg immediately made known the object of his visit to Help,
Junior. He inquired if any news had yet been received of the "Viking,"
and if Bergen mariners were really of the opinion that she had gone
down with all on board. He also inquired if this probable shipwreck,
which had plunged so many homes into mourning, had not led the
maritime authorities to make some search for the missing vessel.

"But where were they to begin?" replied Help, Junior. "They do not
even know where the shipwreck occurred."

"True, my dear Help, and for that very reason they should endeavor to
ascertain."

"But how?"

"Why, though they do not know where the 'Viking' foundered, they
certainly know where the bottle was picked up by the Danish vessel. So
we have one valuable clew which it would be very wrong to ignore."

"Where was it?"

"Listen, my dear Help, and I will tell you."

Sylvius Hogg then apprised his friend of the important information
which had just been received through the Naval Department, and the
full permission given him to utilize it.

The bottle containing Ole Kamp's lottery-ticket had been picked up on
the third of June, about two hundred miles south of Iceland, by the
schooner "Christian," of Elsineur, Captain Mosselman, and the wind was
blowing strong from the south-east at the time.

The captain had immediately examined the contents of the bottle, as it
was certainly his duty to do, inasmuch as he might-have rendered very
effectual aid to the survivors of the "Viking" had he known where
the catastrophe occurred; but the lines scrawled upon the back of the
lottery-ticket gave no clew, so the "Christian" could not direct her
course to the scene of the shipwreck.

This Captain Mosselman was an honest man. Very possibly some less
scrupulous person would have kept the ticket; but he had only one
thought--to transmit the ticket to the person to whom it was addressed
as soon as he entered port. Hulda Hansen, of Dal, that was enough. It
was not necessary to know any more.

But on reaching Copenhagen, Captain Mosselman said to himself that it
would perhaps be better to transmit the document through the hands of
the Danish authorities, instead of sending it straight to the person
for whom it was intended. This would be the safest, as well as
the regular way. He did so, and the Naval Department at Copenhagen
promptly notified the Naval Department at Christiania.

Sylvius Hogg's letter, asking for information in regard to the
"Viking," had already been received, and the deep interest he took in
the Hansen family was well known. It was known, too, that he intended
to remain in Dal some time longer, so it was there that the ticket
found by the Danish sea-captain was sent, to be delivered into Hulda
Hansen's hands by the famous deputy.

And ever since that time the public had taken a deep interest in the
affair, which had not been forgotten, thanks to the touching details
given by the newspapers of both continents.

Sylvius Hogg stated the case briefly to his friend Help, who listened
to him with the deepest interest, and without once interrupting him.
He concluded his recital by saying:

"There is certainly one point about which there can be no possible
doubt: this is, that on the third day of June, about one month after
the departure from Saint-Pierre-Miquelon, the ticket was picked up two
hundred miles south-west of Iceland."

"And that is all you know?"

"Yes, my dear Help, but by consulting some of the most experienced
mariners of Bergen, men who are familiar with that locality, with the
general direction of its winds, and, above-all, with its currents,
will it not be a comparatively easy matter to decide upon the route
followed by the bottle? Then, by calculating its probable speed, and
the time that elapsed before it was picked up, it certainly would not
be impossible to discover the spot at which it was cast into the sea
by Ole Kamp, that is to say, the scene of the shipwreck."

Help, Junior, shook his head with a doubting air. Would not any search
that was based upon such vague indications as these be sure to prove a
failure? The shipowner, being of a decided, cool and practical turn
of mind, certainly thought so, and felt it his duty to say as much to
Sylvius Hogg.

"Perhaps it may prove a failure, friend Help," was the prompt
rejoinder; "but the fact that we have been able to secure only vague
information, is certainly no reason for abandoning the undertaking. I
am anxious that nothing shall be left undone for these poor people to
whom I am indebted for my life. Yes, if need be, I would not hesitate
to sacrifice all I possess to find Ole Kamp, and bring him safely back
to his betrothed, Hulda Hansen."

Then Sylvius Hogg proceeded to give a full account of his adventure
on the Rjukanfos. He related the intrepid manner in which Joel and his
sister had risked their own lives to save him, and how, but for their
timely assistance, he would not have had the pleasure of being the
guest of his friend Help that day.

His friend Help, as we said before, was an eminently practical man,
but he was not opposed to useless and even impossible efforts when
a question of humanity was involved, and he finally approved what
Sylvius Hogg wished to attempt.

"Sylvius," he said, "I will assist you by every means in my power.
Yes, you are right. However small the chance of finding some survivor
of the 'Viking' may be, and especially of finding this brave Ole whose
betrothed saved your life, it must not be neglected."

"No, Help, no," interrupted the professor; "not if it were but one
chance in a hundred thousand."

"So this very day, Sylvius, I will assemble all the most experienced
seamen of Bergen in my office. I will send for all who have navigated
or who are now navigating the ocean between Iceland and Newfoundland,
and we will see what they advise us to do."

"And what they advise us to do we will do," added Sylvius Hogg,
without an instant's hesitation. "I have the approval of the
government. In fact, I am authorized to send one of its dispatch-boats
in search of the 'Viking,' and I feel sure that no one will hesitate
to take part in such a work."

"I will pay a visit to the marine bureau, and see what I can learn
there," remarked Help, Junior.

"Would you like me to accompany you?"

"It is not necessary, and you must be fatigued."

"Fatigued! I--at my age?"

"Nevertheless, you had better rest until my return, my dear and
ever-young Sylvius."

That same day there was a large meeting of captains of merchant and
whaling vessels, as well as pilots, in the office of Help Bros.--an
assemblage of men who were still navigating the seas, as well as of
those who had retired from active service.

Sylvius Hogg explained the situation briefly but clearly. He told them
the date--May 3d--on which the bottle had been cast into the sea by
Ole Kamp, and the date--June 3d--on which it had been picked up by the
Danish captain, two hundred miles south-west of Iceland.

The discussion that followed was long and serious. There was not one
of these brave men who were not familiar with the currents of that
locality, and upon the direction of these currents they must, of
course, chiefly depend for a solution of the problem.

But it was an incontestable fact that at the time of the shipwreck,
and during the interval that elapsed between the sailing of the
"Viking" from Saint-Pierre-Miquelon, and the discovery of the bottle
by the Danish vessel, constant gales from the south-east had disturbed
that portion of the Atlantic. In fact, it was to one of these tempests
that the catastrophe must be attributed. Probably the "Viking," being
unable to carry sail in the teeth of the tempest, had been obliged to
scud before the windy and it being at this season of the year that the
ice from the polar seas begins to make its way down into the Atlantic,
it was more than likely that a collision had taken place, and that
the "Viking" had been crushed by a floating iceberg, which it was
impossible to avoid.

Still, in that case, was it not more than probable that the whole,
or a part, of the ship's crew had taken refuge upon one of these ice
fields after having placed a quantity of provisions upon it? If they
had really done so, the iceberg, having certainly been driven in a
north-westerly direction by the winds which were prevailing at the
time, it was not unlikely that the survivors had been able to reach
some point on the coast of Greenland, so it was in that direction, and
in those seas, that search should be made.

This was the unanimous opinion of these experienced mariners, and
there could be no doubt that this was the only feasible plan. But
would they find aught save a few fragments of the "Viking" in case the
vessel had been crushed by some enormous iceberg? Could they hope to
effect the rescue of any survivors?

This was more than doubtful, and the professor on putting the question
perceived that the more competent could not, or would not, reply.
Still, this was no cause for inaction--they were all agreed upon that
point--but action must be taken without delay.

There are always several government vessels at Bergen, and one of
the three dispatch-boats charged with the surveillance of the western
coast of Norway is attached to this port. As good luck would have it,
that very boat was now riding at anchor in the bay.

After making a note of the various suggestions advanced by the most
experienced seamen who had assembled at the office of Help, Junior,
Sylvius Hogg went aboard the dispatch-boat "Telegraph," and apprised
the commander of the special mission intrusted to him by the
government.

The commander received him very cordially, and declared his
willingness to render all the assistance in his power. He had become
familiar with the navigation of the locality specified during several
long and dangerous voyages from the Loffoden Islands and Finmark to
the Iceland and Newfoundland fisheries; so he would have experience
to aid him in the humane work he was about to undertake, as he fully
agreed with the seamen already consulted that it was in the waters
between Iceland and Greenland that they must look for the survivors,
or at least for some trace of the "Viking." If he did not succeed
there, he would, however, explore the neighboring shores, and perhaps
the eastern part of Baffin's Bay.

"I am all ready to start, sir," he added. "My coal and provisions
are on board, my crew has been selected, and I can set sail this very
day."

"Thank you, captain," replied the professor, "not only for your
promptness, but for the very kind reception you have given me. But one
question more: Can you tell me how long it will take you to reach the
shores of Greenland?"

"My vessel makes about eleven knots an hour, and as the distance from
Bergen to Greenland is only about twenty degrees, I can count upon
arriving there in less than a week."

"Make all possible haste, captain," replied Sylvius Hogg. "If any
of the shipwrecked crew did survive the catastrophe, two months have
already elapsed since the vessel went down, and they are perhaps in a
destitute and even famishing condition upon some desert coast."

"Yes, there is no time to lose, Monsieur Hogg. I will start this very
day, keep my vessel going at the top of her speed, and as soon as
I find any trace whatever I will inform the Naval Department at
Christiania by a telegram from Newfoundland."

"God-speed you, captain," replied Sylvius Hogg, "and may you succeed."

That same day the "Telegraph" set sail, followed by the sympathizing
cheers of the entire population of Bergen, and it was not without keen
emotion that the kind-hearted people watched the vessel make its way
down the channel, and finally disappear behind the islands of the
fiord.

But Sylvius Hogg did not confine his efforts to the expedition
undertaken by the dispatch-boat "Telegraph." On the contrary, he was
resolved to multiply the chances of finding some trace of the missing
"Viking." Would it not be possible to excite a spirit of emulation in
the captains of merchant vessels and fishing-smacks that navigated the
waters of Iceland and the Faroe Islands? Unquestionably. So a reward
of two thousand marks was promised in the name of the government to
any vessel that would furnish any information in regard to the missing
"Viking," and one of five thousand marks to any vessel that would
bring one of the survivors of the shipwreck back to his native land.

So, during the two days spent in Bergen Sylvius Hogg did everything
in his power to insure the success of the enterprise, and he was
cheerfully seconded in his efforts by Help, Junior, and all the
maritime authorities. M. Help would have been glad to have the worthy
deputy as a guest some time longer, but though Sylvius Hogg thanked
him cordially he declined to prolong his stay. He was anxious to
rejoin Hulda and Joel, being afraid to leave them to themselves too
long, but Help, Junior, promised him that any news that might be
received should be promptly transmitted to Dal.

So, on the morning of the 4th, after taking leave of his friend
Help, Sylvius Hogg re-embarked on the "Run" to cross the fiord of the
Hardanger, and if nothing unforeseen occurred he counted on reaching
the Telemark by the evening of the 5th.




CHAPTER XIV.


The day that Sylvius Hogg left Bergen proved an eventful one at the
inn.

After the professor's departure the house seemed deserted. It almost
seemed as if the kind friend of the young Hansens had taken away with
him, not only the last hope, but the life of the family, and left only
a charnel-house behind him.

During the two days that followed no guests presented themselves at
the inn. Joel had no occasion to absent himself, consequently, but
could remain with Hulda, whom he was very unwilling to leave alone
with her own thoughts.

Dame Hansen seemed to become more and more a prey to secret anxiety.
She seemed to feel no interest in anything connected with her
children, not even in the loss of the "Viking." She lived a life
apart, remaining shut up in her own room, and appearing only at
meal-time. When she did address a word to Hulda or Joel it was only
to reproach them directly or indirectly on the subject of the
lottery-ticket, which neither of them felt willing to dispose of
at any price. Offers for the ticket continued to pour in from every
corner of the globe. A positive mania seemed to have seized certain
brains. Such a ticket must certainly be predestined to win the prize
of one hundred thousand marks--there could be no doubt of it, so said
every one. A person would have supposed there was but one ticket in
the lottery, and that the number of it was 9672. The Manchester man
and the Bostonian were still at the head of the list. The Englishman
had outbid his rival by a few pounds, but he, in turn, was soon
distanced by an advance of several hundred dollars. The last bid was
one of eight thousand marks--and it could be explained only as the
result of positive madness, unless it was a question of national pride
on this part of an American and an Englishman.

However this may have been Hulda refused all these offers, and her
conduct excited the bitter disapproval of Dame Hansen.

"What if I should order you to sell this ticket? Yes, order you to
sell it," she said to her daughter one day.

"I should be very sorry, mother, but I should be obliged to refuse."

"But if it should become absolutely necessary, what then?"

"But how can that be possible?" asked Joel.

Dame Hansen made no reply. She had turned very pale on hearing this
straightforward question, and now withdrew, muttering some incoherent
words.

"There is certainly something wrong," remarked Joel. "There must be
some difficulty between mother and Sandgoist."

"Yes, brother, we must be prepared for some serious complications in
the future."

"Have we not suffered enough during the past few weeks, my poor Hulda?
What fresh catastrophe threatens us?"

"How long Monsieur Sylvius stays!" exclaimed Hulda, without paying
any apparent heed to the question. "When he is here I feel less
despondent."

"And yet, what can he do for us?" replied Joel.

What could there have been in Dame Hansen's past that she was
unwilling to confide to her children? What foolish pride prevented her
from revealing to them the cause of her disquietude? Had she any real
cause to reproach herself? And on the other hand, why did she endeavor
to influence her daughter in regard to Ole Kamp's ticket, and the
price that was to be set upon it? Why did she seem so eager to dispose
of it, or rather, to secure the money that had been offered for it?
Hulda and Joel were about to learn.

On the morning of the 4th Joel escorted his sister to the little
chapel where she went every morning to pray for the lost one. Her
brother always waited for her, and accompanied her back to the house.

That day, on returning, they both perceived Dame Hansen in the
distance, walking rapidly in the direction of the inn. She was not
alone. A man was walking beside her--a man who seemed to be talking in
a loud voice, and whose gestures were vehement and imperious.

Hulda and her brother both paused suddenly.

"Who is that man?" inquired Joel.

Hulda advanced a few steps.

"I know him," she said at last.

"You know him?"

"Yes, it is Sandgoist."

"Sandgoist, of Drammen, who came here during my absence?"

"Yes."

"And who acted in such a lordly way that he would seem to have mother,
and us, too, perhaps, in his power?"

"The same, brother; and he has probably come to make us feel his power
to-day."

"What power? This time I will know the object of his visit."

Joel controlled himself, though not without an evident effort, and
followed his sister.

In a few moments Dame Hansen and Sandgoist reached the door of the
inn. Sandgoist crossed the threshold first; then the door closed upon
Dame Hansen and upon him, and both of them entered the large parlor.

As Joel and Hulda approached the house the threatening voice of
Sandgoist became distinctly audible. They paused and listened; Dame
Hansen was speaking now, but in entreating tones.

"Let us go in," remarked Joel.

Hulda entered with a heavy heart; Joel was trembling with suppressed
anger and impatience.

Sandgoist sat enthroned in the big arm-chair. He did not even take the
trouble to rise on the entrance of the brother and sister. He merely
turned his head and stared at them over his spectacles.

"Ah! here is the charming Hulda, if I'm not mistaken," he exclaimed in
a tone that incensed Joel even more deeply.

Dame Hansen was standing in front of the man in an humble almost
cringing attitude, but she instantly straightened herself up, and
seemed greatly annoyed at the sight of her children.

"And this is her brother, I suppose?" added Sandgoist.

"Yes, her brother," retorted Joel.

Then, advancing until within a few steps of the arm-chair, he asked,
brusquely:

"What do you want here?"

Sandgoist gave him a withering look; then, in a harsh voice, and
without rising, he replied:

"You will soon learn, young man. You happen in just at the right time.
I was anxious to see you, and if your sister is a sensible girl we
shall soon come to an understanding. But sit down, and you, too, young
woman, had better do the same."

Sandgoist seemed to be doing the honors of his own house, and Joel
instantly noted the fact.

"Ah, ha! you are displeased! What a touchy young man you seem to be!"

"I am not particularly touchy that I know of, but I don't feel
inclined to accept civilities from those who have no right to offer
them."

"Joel!" cried Dame Hansen.

"Brother, brother!" exclaimed Hulda, with an imploring look.

Joel made a violent effort to control himself, and to prevent himself
from yielding to his desire to throw this coarse wretch out of the
window, he retired to a corner of the room.

"Can I speak now?" inquired Sandgoist.

An affirmative sign from Dame Hansen was all the answer he obtained,
but it seemed to be sufficient.

"What I have to say is this," he began, "and I would like all three of
you to listen attentively, for I don't fancy being obliged to repeat
my words."

That he spoke like a person who had an indisputable right to his own
way was only too evident to each and every member of the party.

"I have learned through the newspapers," he continued, "of the
misfortune which has befallen a certain Ole Kamp--a young seaman of
Bergen--and of a lottery-ticket that he bequeathed to his betrothed,
Hulda Hansen, just as his ship, the 'Viking,' was going down. I have
also learned that the public at large feels convinced that this will
prove the fortunate ticket by reason of the peculiar circumstances
under which it was found. I have also learned that some very liberal
offers for the purchase of this ticket have been received by Hulda
Hansen."

He was silent for a moment, then:

"Is this true?" he added.

He was obliged to wait some time for an answer to this question.

"Yes, it is true," replied Joel, at last. "And what of it, if you
please?"

"These offers are, in my opinion, the result of a most absurd and
senseless superstition," continued Sandgoist, "but for all that,
they will continue to be made, and to increase in amount, as the day
appointed for the drawing approaches. Now, I am a business man myself,
and I have taken it into my head that I should like to have a hand in
this little speculation myself, so I left Drammen yesterday to come to
Dal to arrange for the transfer of this ticket, and to beg Dame Hansen
to give me the preference over all other would-be purchasers."

Hulda was about to make Sandgoist the same answer she had given to
all offers of this kind, though his remarks had not been addressed
directly to her, when Joel checked her.

"Before replying, I should like to ask Monsieur Sandgoist if he knows
to whom this ticket belongs?" he said haughtily.

"To Hulda Hansen, I suppose."

"Very well; then it is to Hulda Hansen that this application should be
addressed."

"My son!" hastily interposed Dame Hansen.

"Let me finish, mother," continued Joel. "This ticket belonged
originally to our cousin, Ole Kamp, and had not Ole Kamp a perfect
right to bequeath it to his betrothed?"

"Unquestionably," replied Sandgoist.

"Then it is to Hulda Hanson that you must apply, if you wish to
purchase it."

"So be it, Master Formality," retorted Sandgoist. "I now ask Hulda to
sell me this ticket Number 9672 that Ole Kamp bequeathed to her."

"Monsieur Sandgoist," the young girl answered in firm but quiet tones,
"I have received a great many offers for this ticket, but they have
been made in vain. I shall say to you exactly what I have said to
others. If my betrothed sent me this ticket with his last farewell
upon it it was because he wished me to keep it, so I will not part
with it at any price."

Having said this Hulda turned, as if to leave the room, evidently
supposing that the conversation so far as she was concerned had
been terminated by her refusal, but at a gesture from her mother she
paused.

An exclamation of annoyance had escaped Dame Hansen, and Sandgoist's
knitted brows and flashing eyes showed that anger was beginning to
take possession of him.

"Yes, remain, Hulda," said he. "This is not your final answer. If I
insist it is because I certainly have a right to do so. Besides,
I think I must have stated the case badly, or rather you must have
misunderstood me. It is certain that the chances of this ticket have
not increased because the hand of a shipwrecked seaman placed it in a
bottle and it was subsequently recovered; still, the public seldom or
never reasons, and there is not the slightest doubt that many persons
desire to become the owners of it. They have already offered to
purchase it, and other offers are sure to follow. It is simply a
business transaction, I repeat, and I have come to propose a good
trade to you."

"You will have some difficulty in coming to an understanding with my
sister, sir," replied Joel, ironically. "When you talk business to her
she replies with sentiment."

"That is all idle talk, young man," replied Sandgoist. "When my
explanation is concluded you will see that however advantageous the
transaction may be to me it will be equally so to her. I may also
add that it will be equally so to her mother, Dame Hansen, who is
personally interested in the matter."

Joel and Hulda exchanged glances. Were they about to learn the secret
Dame Hansen had so long concealed from them?

"I do not ask that this ticket shall be sold to me for what Ole
Kamp paid for it," continued Sandgoist. No! Right or wrong, it has
certainly acquired an increased financial value, and I am willing to
make a sacrifice to become the owner of it."

"You have already been told that Hulda has refused much better offers
than yours," replied Joel.

"Indeed!" exclaimed Sandgoist. "Much better offers, you say. How do
you know?"

"Whatever your offer may be, my sister refuses it, and I approve of
her decision."

"Ah! am I dealing with Joel or Hulda Hansen, pray?"

"My sister and I are one," retorted Joel. "It would be well for you to
become satisfied of this fact, as you seem to be ignorant of it."

Sandgoist shrugged his shoulders, but without being at all
disconcerted, for like a man who is sure of his arguments, he replied:

"When I spoke of the price I was willing to pay for the ticket, I
ought to have told you that I could offer inducements which Hulda
Hansen can hardly reject if she takes any interest in the welfare of
her family."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, and it would be well for you, young man, to understand, in your
turn, that I did not come to Dal to beg your sister to sell me this
ticket. No, a thousand times no."

"For what, then?"

"I do not ask for it, I demand it. I will have it."

"And by what right?" exclaimed Joel, "and how dare you, a stranger,
speak in this way in my mother's house?"

"By the right every man has to speak as he pleases, and when he
pleases, in his own house," retorted Sandgoist.

"In his own house?"

Joel, in his indignation, stepped threateningly toward Sandgoist, who,
though not easily frightened, sprung hastily out of his arm-chair. But
Hulda laid a detaining hand upon her brother's arm, while Dame Hansen,
burying her face in her hands, retreated to the other end of the room.

"Brother, look at her!" whispered the young girl.

Joel paused suddenly. A glance at his mother paralyzed him. Her very
attitude revealed how entirely Dame Hansen was in this scoundrel's
power.

Sandgoist, seeing Joel's hesitation, recovered his self-possession,
and resumed his former seat.

"Yes, in his own house," he continued in a still more arrogant voice.
"Ever since her husband's death, Dame Hansen has been engaging in
unsuccessful speculations. After losing the small fortune your father
left at his death, she was obliged to borrow money of a Christiania
banker, offering this house as security for a loan of fifteen thousand
marks. About a year ago I purchased the mortgage, and this house will
consequently become my property--and very speedily--if I am not paid
when this mortgage becomes due."

"When is it due?" demanded Joel.

"On the 20th of July, or eighteen days from now," replied Sandgoist.
"Then, whether you like it or not, I shall be in my own house here."

"You will not be in your own house here until that date, even if you
are not paid at that time," retorted Joel, "and I forbid you to speak
as you have been doing in the presence of my mother and sister."

"He forbids me--me!" exclaimed Sandgoist. "But how about his
mother--what does she say?"

"Speak, mother!" cried Joel, approaching Dame Hansen, and endeavoring
to remove her hands from her face.

"Joel, my brother," exclaimed Hulda. "I entreat you, for my sake, to
be calm."

Dame Hansen bowed her head upon her breast, not daring to meet
her son's searching eyes. It was only too true that she had been
endeavoring to increase her fortune by rash speculations for several
years past. The small sum of money at her disposal had soon melted
away, and she had been obliged to borrow at a high rate of interest.
And now the mortgage had passed into the hands of this Sandgoist--a
heartless and unprincipled man--a well-known usurer, who was heartily
despised throughout the country. Dame Hansen, however, had seen him
for the first time when he came to Dal to satisfy himself in regard to
the value of the property.

This was the secret that had weighed so heavily upon her. This,
too, explained her reserve, for she had not dared to confide in her
children. This was the secret she had sedulously kept from those whose
future she had blighted.

Hulda scarcely dared to think of what she had just heard. Yes,
Sandgoist was indeed a master who had the power to enforce his will!
The ticket he wished to purchase would probably be worth nothing a
fortnight hence, and if she did not consent to relinquish it certain
ruin would follow--their house would be sold over their heads, and the
Hansen family would be homeless and penniless.

Hulda dared not even glance at Joel, but Joel was too angry to pay any
heed to these threats. He could think only of Sandgoist, and if the
man continued to talk in this way the impetuous youth felt that he
should not be able to control himself much longer.

Sandgoist, seeing that he had once more become master of the
situation, grew even more arrogant and imperious in his manner.

"I want that ticket, and I intend to have it," he repeated. "In
exchange for it I offer no fixed price, but I promise to extend the
mortgage for one--two, or three years--Fix the date yourself, Hulda."

Hulda's heart was so deeply oppressed with anguish that she was unable
to reply, but her brother answered for her.

"Ole Kamp's ticket can not be sold by Hulda Hansen. My sister refuses
your offer, in spite of your threats. Now leave the house!"

"Leave the house," repeated Sandgoist. "I shall do nothing of the
kind. If the offer I have made does not satisfy you I will go even
further. In exchange for the ticket I offer you--I offer you--"

Sandgoist must certainly have felt an irresistible desire to possess
this ticket--or at least he most have been convinced that the purchase
would prove a most advantageous one to him, for he seated himself at
a table upon which lay pen, ink, and paper, and a moment afterward he
added:

"Here is what I offer."

It was a receipt for the amount of Dame Hansen's indebtedness--a
receipt for the amount of the mortgage on the Dal property.

Dame Hansen cowered in her corner, with hands outstretched, and eyes
fixed imploringly on her daughter.

"And now give me the ticket," cried Sandgoist, "I want it to-day--this
very instant. I will not leave Dal without it"

As he spoke he stepped hastily toward the poor girl as if with the
intention of searching her pockets, and wresting the ticket from her.

This was more than Joel could endure, especially when he heard Hulda's
startled cry of "Brother! brother!"

"Get out of here!" he shouted, roughly. And seeing that Sandgoist
showed no intention of obeying, the young man was about to spring upon
him, when Hulda hastily interposed.

"Here is the ticket, mother," she cried.

Dame Hansen seized it, and as she exchanged it for Sandgoist's receipt
her daughter sunk, almost fainting, into an arm-chair.

"Hulda! Hulda! Oh, what have you done?" cried Joel.

"What has she done," replied Dame Hansen. "Yes, I am guilty--for
my children's sake I wished to increase the property left by their
father, but instead I have reduced them to poverty. But Hulda has
saved us all. That is what she has done. Thank you, Hulda, thank you."

Sandgoist still lingered. Joel perceived the fact.

"You are here still," he continued, roughly. And springing upon
Sandgoist he seized him by the shoulders and hustled him out-of-doors
in spite of his protests and resistance.




CHAPTER XV.


Sylvius Hogg reached Dal on the evening of the following day. He did
not say a word about his journey, and no one knew that he had been to
Bergen. As long as the search was productive of no results he wished
the Hansen family to remain in ignorance of it. Every letter or
telegram, whether from Bergen or Christiania, was to be addressed to
him, at the inn, where he intended to await further developments.
Did he still hope? Yes, though it must be admitted that he had some
misgivings.

As soon as he returned the professor became satisfied that some
important event had occurred in his absence. The altered manner of
Joel and Hulda showed conclusively that an explanation must have taken
place between their mother and themselves. Had some new misfortunes
befallen the Hansen household?

All this of course troubled Sylvius Hogg greatly. He felt such a
paternal affection for the brother and sister that he could not have
been more fond of them if they had been his own children. How much he
had missed them during his short absence.

"They will tell me all by and by," he said to himself. "They will have
to tell me all. Am I not a member of the family?"

Yes; Sylvius Hogg felt now that he had an undoubted right to be
consulted in regard to everything connected with the private life of
his young friends, and to know why Joel and Hulda seemed even more
unhappy than at the time of his departure. The mystery was soon
solved.

In fact both the young people were anxious to confide in the excellent
man whom they loved with a truly filial devotion, but they were
waiting for him to question them. During his absence they had felt
lonely and forsaken--the more so from the fact that Sylvius Hogg had
not seen fit to tell them where he was going. Never had the hours
seemed so long. It never once occurred to them that the journey was
in any way connected with a search for the "Viking," and that
Sylvius Hogg had concealed the fact from them in order to spare them
additional disappointment in case of failure.

And now how much more necessary his presence seemed to have become to
them! How glad they were to see him, to listen to his words of counsel
and hear his kind and encouraging voice. But would they ever dare to
tell him what had passed between them and the Drammen usurer, and
how Dame Hansen had marred the prospects of her children? What would
Sylvius Hogg say when he learned that the ticket was no longer in
Hulda's possession, and when he heard that Dame Hansen had used it to
free herself from her inexorable creditor?

He was sure to learn these facts, however. Whether it was Sylvius Hogg
or Hulda that first broached the subject, it would be hard to say, nor
does it matter much. This much is certain, however, the professor soon
became thoroughly acquainted with the situation of affairs. He was
told of the danger that had threatened Dame Hansen and her children,
and how the usurer would have driven them from their old home in
a fortnight if the debt had not been paid by the surrender of the
ticket.

Sylvius Hogg listened attentively to this sad story.

"You should not have given up the ticket," he cried, vehemently; "no,
you should not have done it."

"How could I help it, Monsieur Sylvius?" replied the poor girl,
greatly troubled.

"You could not, of course, and yet--Ah, if I had only been here!"

And what would Professor Sylvius Hogg have done had he been there? He
did not say, however, but continued:

"Yes, my dear Hulda; yes, Joel, you did the best you could, under the
circumstances. But what enrages me almost beyond endurance is the
fact that this Sandgoist will profit greatly, no doubt, by this absurd
superstition on the part of the public. If poor Ole's ticket should
really prove to be the lucky one this unprincipled scoundrel will
reap all the benefit. And yet, to suppose that this number, 9672,
will necessarily prove the lucky one, is simply ridiculous and absurd.
Still, I would not have given up the ticket, I think. After once
refusing to surrender it to Sandgoist Hulda would have done better to
turn a deaf ear to her mother's entreaties."

The brother and sister could find nothing to say in reply. In giving
the ticket to Dame Hansen, Hulda had been prompted by a filial
sentiment that was certainly to be commended rather than censured. The
sacrifice she had made was not one of more or less probable chance,
but of Ole Kamp's last wishes and of her last memento of her lover.

But it was too late to think of this now. Sandgoist had the ticket.
It belonged to him, and he would sell it to the highest bidder. A
heartless usurer would thus coin money out of the touching farewell of
the shipwrecked mariner. Sylvius Hogg could not bear the thought. It
was intolerable to him.

He resolved to have a talk with Dame Hansen on the subject that very
day. This conversation could effect no change in the state of affairs,
but it had become almost necessary.

"So you think I did wrong, Monsieur Hogg?" she asked, after allowing
the professor to say all he had to say on the subject.

"Certainly, Dame Hansen."

"If you blame me for having engaged in rash speculations, and for
endangering the fortune of my children, you are perfectly right; but
if you blame me for having resorted to the means I did to free myself,
you are wrong. What have you to say in reply?"

"Nothing."

"But seriously, do you think that I ought to have refused the offer of
Sandgoist, who really offered fifteen thousand marks for a ticket that
is probably worth nothing; I ask you again, do you think I ought to
have refused it?"

"Yes and no, Dame Hansen."

"It can not be both yes and no, professor; it is no. Under different
circumstances, and if the future had appeared less threatening--though
that was my own fault, I admit--I should have upheld Hulda in her
refusal to part with the ticket she had received from Ole Kamp. But
when there was a certainty of being driven in a few days from the
house in which my husband died, and in which my children first saw
the light, I could not understand such a refusal, and you yourself,
Monsieur Hogg, had you been in my place, would certainly have acted as
I did."

"No, Dame Hansen, no!"

"What would you have done, then?"

"I would have done anything rather than sacrifice a ticket my daughter
had received under such circumstances."

"Do these circumstances, in your opinion, enhance the value of the
ticket?"

"No one can say."

"On the contrary, every one does know. This ticket is simply one that
has nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine
chances of losing against one of winning. Do you consider it any more
valuable because it was found in a bottle that was picked up at sea?"

Sylvius Hogg hardly knew what to say in reply to this straightforward
question, so he reverted to the sentimental side of the question by
remarking:

"The situation now seems to be briefly as follows: Ole Kamp, as the
ship went down, bequeathed to Hulda the sole earthly possession left
him, with the request that she should present it on the day of the
drawing, provided, of course, that the ticket reached her; and now
this ticket is no longer in Hulda's possession."

"If Ole Kamp had been here, he would not have hesitated to surrender
his ticket to Sandgoist," replied Dame Hansen.

"That is quite possible," replied Sylvius Hogg; "but certainly no
other person had a right to do it, and what will you say to him if he
has not perished and if he should return to-morrow, or this very day?"

"Ole will never return," replied Dame Hansen, gloomily. "Ole is dead,
Monsieur Hogg, dead, beyond a doubt."

"You can not be sure of that, Dame Hansen," exclaimed the professor.
"In fact, you know nothing at all about it. Careful search is being
made for some survivor of the shipwreck. It may prove successful; yes,
even before the time appointed for the drawing of this lottery. You
have no right to say that Ole Kamp is dead, so long as we have no
proof that he perished in the catastrophe. The reason I speak with
less apparent assurance before your children is that I do not want to
arouse hopes that may end in bitter disappointment. But to you, Dame
Hansen, I can say what I really think, and I can not, I will not
believe that Ole Kamp is dead! No, I will not believe it!"

Finding herself thus worsted, Dame Hansen ceased to argue the
question, and this Norwegian, being rather superstitious in her secret
heart, hung her head as if Ole Kamp was indeed about to appear before
her.

"At all events, before parting with the ticket," continued Sylvius
Hogg, "there was one very simple thing that you neglected to do."

"What?"

"You should first have applied to your personal friends or the friends
of your family. They would not have refused to assist you, either by
purchasing the mortgage of Sandgoist, or by loaning you the money to
pay it."

"I have no friends of whom I could ask such a favor."

"Yes, you have, Dame Hansen. I know at least one person who would have
done it without the slightest hesitation."

"And who is that, if you please?"

"Sylvius Hogg, member of the Storthing."

Dame Hansen, too deeply moved to reply in words, bowed her thanks to
the professor.

"But what's done can't be undone, unfortunately," added Sylvius Hogg,
"and I should be greatly obliged to you, Dame Hansen, if you
would refrain from saying anything to your children about this
conversation."

And the two separated.

The professor had resumed his former habits, and his daily walks as
well. In company with Joel and Hulda, he spent several hours every
day in visiting the points of interest in and about Dal--not going too
far, however, for fear of wearying the young girl. Much of his time,
too, was devoted to his extensive correspondence. He wrote letter
after letter to Bergen and Christiania, stimulating the zeal all who
were engaged in the good work of searching for the "Viking." To find
Ole seemed to be his sole aim in life now.

He even felt it his duty to again absent himself for twenty-four
hours, doubtless for an object in some way connected with the affair
in which Dame Hansen's family was so deeply interested; but, as
before, he maintained absolute silence in regard to what he was doing
or having done in this matter.

In the meantime Hulda regained strength but slowly. The poor girl
lived only upon the recollection of Ole; and her hope of seeing him
again grew fainter from day to day. It is true, she had near her the
two beings she loved best in the world; and one of them never ceased
to encourage her; but would that suffice? Was it not necessary to
divert her mind at any cost? But how was her mind to be diverted from
the gloomy thoughts that bound her, as it were, to the shipwrecked
"Viking?"

The 12th of July came. The drawing of the Christiania Schools Lottery
was to take place in four days.

It is needless to say that Sandgoist's purchase had come to the
knowledge of the public. The papers announced that the famous ticket
bearing the number 9672 was now in the possession of M. Sandgoist, of
Drammen, and that this ticket would be sold to the highest bidder;
so, if M. Sandgoist was now the owner of the aforesaid ticket, he must
have purchased it for a round sum of Hulda Hansen.

Of course this announcement lowered the young girl very decidedly in
public estimation. What! Hulda Hansen had consented to sell the ticket
belonging to her lost lover? She had turned this last memento of him
into money?

But a timely paragraph that appeared in the "Morgen-Blad" gave the
readers a true account of what had taken place. It described the real
nature of Sandgoist's interference, and how the ticket had come into
his hands. And now it was upon the Drammen usurer that public odium
fell; upon the heartless creditor who had not hesitated to take
advantage of the misfortunes of the Hansen family, and as if by common
consent the offers which had been made while Hulda held the ticket
were not renewed. The ticket seemed to have lost its supernatural
value since it had been defiled by Sandgoist's touch, so that worthy
had made but a bad bargain, after all, and the famous ticket, No.
9672, appeared likely to be left on his hands.

It is needless to say that neither Hulda nor Joel was aware of what
had been said, and this was fortunate, for it would have been very
painful to them to become publicly mixed up in an affair which had
assumed such a purely speculative character since it came into the
hands of the usurer.

Late on the afternoon of the 12th of July, a letter arrived, addressed
to Professor Sylvius Hogg.

This missive, which came from the Naval Department, contained another
which had been mailed at Christiansand, a small town situated at the
mouth of the Gulf of Christiania. It could hardly have contained any
news, however, for Sylvius Hogg put it in his pocket and said nothing
to Joel or his sister about its contents.

But when he bade them good-night on retiring to his chamber, he
remarked:

"The drawing of the lottery is to take place in three days as you are,
of course, aware, my children. You intend to be present, do you not?"

"What is the use, Monsieur Sylvius?" responded Hulda.

"But Ole wished his betrothed to witness it. In fact, he particularly
requested it in the last lines he ever wrote, and I think his wishes
should be obeyed."

"But the ticket is no longer in Hulda's possession," remarked Joel,
"and we do not even know into whose hands it has passed."

"Nevertheless, I think you both ought to accompany me to Christiania
to attend the drawing," replied the professor.

"Do you really desire it, Monsieur Sylvius?" asked the young girl.

"It is not I, my dear Hulda, but Ole who desires it, and Ole's wishes
must be respected."

"Monsieur Sylvius is right, sister," replied Joel. "Yes; you must go.
When do you intend to start, Monsieur Sylvius?"

"To-morrow, at day-break, and may Saint Olaf protect us!"




CHAPTER XVI.


The next morning Foreman Lengling's gayly painted kariol bore away
Sylvius Hogg and Hulda, seated comfortably side by side. There was not
room for Joel, as we know already, so the brave fellow trudged along
on foot at the horse's head.

The fourteen kilometers that lay between Dal and Moel had no terrors
for this untiring walker.

Their route lay along the left bank of the Maan, down the charming
valley of the Vesfjorddal--a narrow, heavily wooded valley, watered by
a thousand dashing cataracts. At each turn in the path, too, one saw
appearing or disappearing the lofty summit of Gousta, with its two
large patches of dazzling snow.

The sky was cloudless, the weather magnificent, the air not too cool,
nor the sun too warm.

Strange to say, Sylvius Hogg's face seemed to have become more serene
since his departure from the inn, though it is not improbable that
his cheerfulness was a trifle forced, so anxious was he that this trip
should divert Joel and Hulda from their sorrowful thoughts.

It took them only about two hours and a half to reach Moel, which is
situated at the end of Lake Tinn. Here they were obliged to leave the
kariol and take a small boat, for at this point a chain of small lakes
begins. The kariol paused near the little church, at the foot of a
water-fall at least five hundred feet in height. This water-fall,
which is visible for only about one fifth of its descent, loses itself
in a deep crevasse before being swallowed up by the lake.

Two boatmen were standing on the shore beside a birch-bark canoe, so
fragile and unstable that the slightest imprudence on the part of its
occupants would inevitably overturn it.

The lake was at its very best this beautiful morning. The sun had
absorbed all the mist of the previous night, and no one could not have
asked for a more superb summer's day.

"You are not tired, my good Joel?" inquired the professor, as he
alighted from the kariol.

"No, Monsieur Sylvius. You forget that I am accustomed to long tramps
through the Telemark."

"That is true. Tell me, do you know the most direct route from Moel to
Christiania?"

"Perfectly, sir. But I fear when we reach Tinoset, at the further end
of the lake, we shall have some difficulty in procuring a kariol, as
we have not warned them of our intended arrival, as is customary in
this country."

"Have no fears, my boy," replied the professor: "I attended to that.
You needn't be afraid that I have any intention of making you foot it
from Dal to Christiania."

"I could easily do it if necessary," remarked Joel.

"But it will not be necessary, fortunately. Now suppose we go over our
route again."

"Well, once at Tinoset, Monsieur Sylvius, we for a time follow the
shores of Lake Fol, passing through Vik and Bolkesko, so as to reach
Mose, and afterward Kongsberg, Hangsund, and Drammen. If we travel
both night and day it will be possible for us to reach Christiania
to-morrow afternoon."

"Very well, Joel. I see that you are familiar with the country, and
the route you propose is certainly a very pleasant one."

"It is also the shortest."

"But I am not at all particular about taking the shortest route,"
replied Sylvius Hogg, laughing. "I know another and even more
agreeable route that prolongs the journey only a few hours, and you,
too, are familiar with it, my boy, though you failed to mention it."

"What route do you refer to?"

"To the one that passes through Bamble."

"Through Bamble?"

"Yes, through Bamble. Don't feign ignorance. Yes, through Bamble,
where Farmer Helmboe and his daughter Siegfrid reside."

"Monsieur Sylvius!"

"Yes, and that is the route we are going to take, following the
northern shore of Lake Fol instead of the southern, but finally
reaching Kongsberg all the same."

"Yes, quite as well, and even better," answered Joel smiling.

"I must thank you in behalf of my brother, Monsieur Sylvius," said
Hulda, archly.

"And for yourself as well, for I am sure that you too will be glad to
see your friend Siegfrid."

The boat being ready, all three seated themselves upon a pile of
leaves in the stern, and the vigorous strokes of the boatsmen soon
carried the frail bark a long way from the shore.

After passing Hackenoes, a tiny hamlet of two or three houses, built
upon a rocky promontory laved by the narrow fiord into which the Maan
empties, the lake begins to widen rapidly. At first it is walled in by
tall cliffs whose real height one can estimate accurately only when a
boat passes their base, appearing no larger than some aquatic bird in
comparison; but gradually the mountains retire into the background.

The lake is dotted here and there with small islands, some absolutely
devoid of vegetation, others covered with verdure through which peep
a few fishermen's huts. Upon the lake, too, may be seen floating
countless logs not yet sold to the saw-mills in the neighborhood.

This sight led Sylvius Hogg to jestingly remark--and he certainly must
have been in a mood for jesting:

"If our lakes are the eyes of Norway, as our poets pretend, it must
be admitted that poor Norway has more than one beam in her eye, as the
Bible says."

About four o'clock the boat reached Tinoset, one of the most primitive
of hamlets. Still that mattered little, as Sylvius Hogg had no
intention of remaining there even for an hour. As he had prophesied
to Joel, a vehicle was awaiting them on the shore, for having decided
upon this journey several weeks before, he had written to Mr. Benett,
of Christiania, requesting him to provide the means of making it with
the least possible fatigue and delay, which explains the fact that a
comfortable carriage was in attendance, with its box well stocked with
eatables, thus enabling the party to dispense with the stale eggs and
sour milk with which travelers are usually regaled in the hamlets of
the Telemark.

Tinoset is situated near the end of Lake Tinn, and here the Maan
plunges majestically into the valley below, where it resumes its
former course.

The horses being already harnessed to the carriage, our friends
immediately started in the direction of Bamble. In those days this
was the only mode of travel in vogue throughout Central Norway, and
through the Telemark in particular, and perhaps modern railroads have
already caused the tourist to think with regret of the national kariol
and Mr. Benett's comfortable carriages.

It is needless to say that Joel was well acquainted with this region,
having traversed it repeatedly on his way from Dal to Bamble.

It was eight o'clock in the evening when Sylvius Hogg and his
protégées reached the latter village. They were not expected, but
Farmer Helmboe received them none the less cordially on that account.
Siegfrid tenderly embraced her friend, and the two young girls being
left alone together for a few moments, they had an opportunity to
discuss the subject that engrossed their every thought.

"Pray do not despair, my dearest Hulda," said Siegfrid; "I have not
ceased to hope, by any means. Why should you abandon all hope of
seeing your poor Ole again? We have learned, through the papers, that
search is being made for the 'Viking.' It will prove successful, I am
certain it will, and I am sure Monsieur Sylvius has not given up all
hope. Hulda, my darling, I entreat you not to despair."

Hulda's tears were her only reply, and Siegfrid pressed her friend
fondly to her heart.

Ah! what joy would have reigned in Farmer Helmboe's household if they
could but have heard of the safe return of the absent one, and have
felt that they really had a right to be happy.

"So you are going direct to Christiania?" inquired the farmer.

"Yes, Monsieur Helmboe."

"To be present at the drawing of the great lottery?"

"Certainly."

"But what good will it do now that Ole's ticket is in the hands of
that wretch, Sandgoist?"

"It was Ole's wish, and it must be respected," replied the professor.

"I hear that the usurer has found no purchaser for the ticket for
which he paid so dearly."

"I too have heard so, friend Helmboe."

"Well, I must say that it serves the rascal right. The man is a
scoundrel, professor, a scoundrel, and it serves him right."

"Yes, friend Helmboe, it does, indeed, serve him right."

Of course they had to take supper at the farm-house. Neither Siegfrid
nor her father would allow their friends to depart without accepting
the invitation, but it would not do for them to tarry too long if they
wished to make up for the time lost by coming around by the way of
Bamble, so at nine o'clock the horses were put to the carriage.

"At my next visit I will spend six hours at the table with you, if you
desire it," said Sylvius Hogg to the farmer; "but to-day I must ask
your permission to allow a cordial shake of the hand from you and the
loving kiss your charming Siegfrid will give Hulda to take the place
of the dessert."

This done they started.

In this high latitude twilight would still last several hours. The
horizon, too, is distinctly visible for a long while after sunset, the
atmosphere is so pure.

It is a beautiful and varied drive from Bamble to Kongsberg. The road
passes through Hitterdal and to the south of Lake Fol, traversing the
southern part of the Telemark, and serving as an outlet to all the
small towns and hamlets of that locality.

An hour after their departure they passed the church of Hitterdal, an
old and quaint edifice, surmounted with gables and turrets rising
one above the other, without the slightest regard to anything like
regularity of outline. The structure is of wood--walls, roofs and
turrets--and though it strongly resembles a motley collection of
pepper-boxes, it is really a venerable and venerated relic of the
Scandinavian architecture of the thirteenth century.

Night came on very gradually--one of those nights still impregnated
with a dim light which about one o'clock begins to blend with that of
early dawn.

Joel, enthroned upon the front seat, was absorbed in his reflections.
Hulda sat silent and thoughtful in the interior of the carriage. But
few words were exchanged between Sylvius Hogg and the postilion, and
these were almost invariably requests to drive faster. No other sound
was heard save the bells on the harness, the cracking of the whip,
and the rumble of wheels over the stony road. They drove on all night,
without once changing horses. It was not necessary to stop at
Listhus, a dreary station, situated in a sort of natural amphitheater,
surrounded by pine-clad mountains. They passed swiftly by Tiness,
too, a picturesque little hamlet, perched on a rocky eminence. Their
progress was rapid in spite of the rather dilapidated condition of
their vehicle, whose bolts and springs rattled and creaked dolorously,
and certainly there was no just cause of complaint against the driver,
though he was half asleep most of the time. But for all that, he urged
his horses briskly on, whipping his jaded steeds mechanically, but
usually aiming his blows at the off horse, for the near one belonged
to him, while the other was the property of a neighbor.

About five o'clock in the morning Sylvius Hogg opened his eyes,
stretched out his arms, and drank in huge draughts of the pungent odor
of the pines.

They had now reached Kongsberg. The carriage was crossing the bridge
over the Laagen, and soon it stopped in front of a house near the
church, and not far from the water-fall of the Larbrö.

"If agreeable to you, my friends," remarked Sylvius Hogg, "we will
stop here only to change horses, for it is still too early for
breakfast. I think it would be much better not to make a real halt
until we reach Drammen. There we can obtain a good meal, and so spare
Monsieur Benett's stock of provisions."

This being decided the professor and Joel treated themselves to a
tiny glass of brandy at the Hotel des Mines, and a quarter of an
hour afterward, fresh horses being in readiness, they resumed their
journey.

On leaving the city they were obliged to ascend a very steep hill.
The road was roughly hewn in the side of the mountain, and from it
the tall towers at the mouth of the silver mines of Kongsberg were
distinctly visible. Then a dense pine forest suddenly hid everything
else from sight--a pine forest through which the sun's rays never
penetrate.

The town of Hangsund furnished fresh horses for the carriage. There
our friends again found themselves on smooth level roads, frequently
obstructed by turnpike gates, where they were obliged to pay a toll of
five or six shillings. This was a fertile region, abounding in trees
that looked like weeping willows, so heavily did the branches droop
under their burden of fruit.

As they neared Drammen, which is situated upon an arm of Christiania
Bay, the country became more hilly. About noon they reached the city
with its two interminable streets, lined with gayly painted houses,
and its wharves where the countless rafts left but a meager space for
the vessels that come here to load with the products of the Northland.

The carriage paused in front of the Scandinavian Hotel. The
proprietor, a dignified-looking personage, with a long, white beard,
and a decidedly professional air, promptly appeared in the door-way of
his establishment.

With that keenness of perception that characterizes inn-keepers in
every country on the globe, he remarked:

"I should not wonder if these gentlemen and this young lady would like
breakfast."

"Yes," replied Sylvius Hogg, "but let us have it as soon as possible."

"It shall be served immediately."

The repast was soon ready, and proved a most tempting one. Mention
should especially be made of a certain fish, stuffed with a savory
herb, of which the professor partook with evident delight.

At half past one o'clock the carriage, to which fresh horses had been
harnessed, was brought to the hotel door, and our friends started down
the principal street of Drammen at a brisk trot.

As they passed a small and dingy dwelling that contrasted strongly
with the gayly painted houses around it, Joel could not repress a
sudden movement of loathing.

"There is Sandgoist?" he exclaimed.

"So that is Sandgoist," remarked Sylvius Hogg. "He certainly has a bad
face."

It was Sandgoist smoking on his door-step. Did he recognize Joel? It
is impossible to say, for the carriage passed swiftly on between the
huge piles of lumber and boards.

Next came a long stretch of level road, bordered with mountain
ash-trees, laden with coral berries, and then they entered the dense
pine forest that skirts a lovely tract of land known as Paradise
Valley.

Afterward they found themselves confronted and surrounded by a host of
small hills, each of which was crowned with a villa or farm-house.
As twilight came on, and the carriage began to descend toward the
sea through a series of verdant meadows, the bright red roofs of neat
farm-houses peeped out here and there through the trees, and soon our
travelers reached Christiania Bay, surrounded by picturesque hills,
and with its innumerable creeks, its tiny ports and wooden piers,
where the steamers and ferry-boats land.

At nine o'clock in the evening, and while it was still light, the
old carriage drove noisily into the city through the already deserted
streets.

In obedience to orders previously given by Sylvius Hogg, the vehicle
drew up in front of the Hotel du Nord. It was there that Hulda and
Joel were to stay, rooms having been engaged for them in advance.
After bidding them an affectionate good-night the professor hastened
to his own home, where his faithful servants, Kate and Fink, were
impatiently awaiting him.




CHAPTER XVII.


Christiania, though it is the largest city in Norway, would be
considered a small town in either England or France; and were it
not for frequent fires, the place would present very much the same
appearance that it did in the eleventh century. It was really rebuilt
in 1624, by King Christian, however; and its name was then changed
from Opsolo, as it had been previously called, to Christiania, in
honor of its royal architect.

It is symmetrically laid out with broad, straight streets: and the
houses are generally of gray stone or red brick. In the center of a
fine garden stands the royal palace, known as the Oscarlot, a large
quadrangular building, devoid of beauty, though built in the Ionic
style of architecture. There are a few churches, in which the
attention of worshipers is not distracted by any marvels of art;
several municipal and government buildings, and one immense bazaar,
constructed in the form of a rotunda, and stocked with both native and
foreign goods.

There is nothing very remarkable about all this, but one thing the
traveler can certainly admire without stint, and that is the site
of the city, which is encircled by mountains so varied in shape and
aspect as to form a most superb frame for Christiania.

Though the city is nearly flat in the new and wealthy quarter, the
hilly portions, where the poorer classes live, are covered with brick
or wooden huts of gaudy tints that astonish rather than charm the
beholder.

Like all cities situated upon the water's edge, and upon fertile
hills, Christiania is extremely picturesque, and it would not be
unjust to compare its fiord to the famous Bay of Naples. Its shores,
like those of Sorrento and Castellamare, are dotted with chalets
and villas, half hidden in the dark, rich verdure of the pines, and
enveloped in the light mist that imparts such a wonderful softness to
northern landscapes.

Sylvius Hogg had at last returned to Christiania, though under
conditions that he little dreamed of at the beginning of his
interrupted journey. Oh, well, he would try that again another year!
He could think only of Joel and Hulda Hansen now. Had there been time
to prepare for them, he would certainly have taken them to his own
home, where old Fink and old Kate would have made them heartily
welcome; but under the circumstances, the professor had thought it
advisable to take them to the Hotel du Nord, where, as protégées
of Sylvius Hogg, they were sure of every attention, though he had
carefully refrained from giving their names, for there had been so
much talk about the brother and sister, and especially about the young
girl, that it would be very embarrassing for her if her arrival in
Christiania should become known.

It had been decided that Sylvius Hogg should not see them again until
breakfast the next day, that is to say, between eleven and twelve
o'clock, as he had some business matters to attend to that would
engross his attention all the forenoon. He would then rejoin them
and remain with them until three o'clock, the hour appointed for the
drawing of the lottery.

Joel, as soon as he rose the next morning, tapped at the door of his
sister's room, and being anxious to divert her thoughts, which were
likely to be more melancholy than ever on such a day, he proposed that
they should walk about the town until breakfast-time, and Hulda, to
please her brother, consented.

It was Sunday, but though the streets of northern cities are usually
quiet and well-nigh deserted on that day, an air of unusual bustle
and animation pervaded the scene, for not only had the townspeople
refrained from going to the country, as usual, but people from the
surrounding towns and country was pouring in in such numbers that the
Lake Miosen Railroad had been obliged to run extra trains.

The number of disinterested persons anxious to attend the drawing of
the famous lottery was even greater than the number of ticket-holders,
consequently the streets were thronged with people. Whole families,
and even whole villages, had come to the city, in the hope that their
journey would not be in vain. Only to think of it! one million tickets
had been sold, and even if they should win a prize of only one or two
hundred marks, how many good people would return home rejoicing!

On leaving the hotel, Joel and Hulda first paid a visit to the wharves
that line the harbor. Here the crowd was not so great except about the
taverns, where huge tankards of beer were being continually called for
to moisten throats that seemed to be in a state of constant thirst.

As the brother and sister wandered about among the long rows of
barrels and boxes, the vessels which were anchored both near and far
from the shore came in for a liberal share of their attention, for
might there not be some from the port of Bergen where the "Viking"
would never more be seen?

"Ole! my poor Ole!" sighed Hulda, and hearing this pathetic
exclamation, Joel led her gently away from the wharves, and up into
the city proper.

There, from the crowds that filled the streets and the public squares,
they overheard more than one remark in relation to themselves.

"Yes," said one man; "I hear that ten thousand marks have been offered
for ticket 9672."

"Ten thousand!" exclaimed another. "Why, I hear that twenty thousand
marks, and even more, have been offered."

"Mr. Vanderbilt, of New York, has offered thirty thousand."

"And Messrs. Baring, of London, forty thousand."

"And the Rothschilds, sixty thousand."

So much for public exaggeration. At this rate the prices offered would
soon have exceeded the amount of the capital prize.

But if these gossips were not agreed upon the sum offered to Hulda
Hansen, they were all of one mind in regard to the usurer of Drammen.

"What an infernal scoundrel Sandgoist must be. That rascal who showed
those poor people no mercy."

"Yes; he is despised throughout the Telemark, and this is not the
first time he has been guilty of similar acts of rascality."

"They say that nobody will buy Ole Kamp's ticket of him, now he has
got it."

"No; nobody wants it now."

"That is not at all surprising. In Hulda Hansen's hands the ticket was
valuable."

"And in Sandgoist's it seems worthless."

"I'm glad of it. He'll have it left on his hands, and I hope he'll
lose the fifteen thousand marks it cost him."

"But what if the scoundrel should win the grand prize?"

"He? Never!"

"He had better not come to the drawing."

"No. If he does he will be roughly handled. There is no question about
that."

These and many other equally uncomplimentary remarks about the usurer
were freely bandied about.

It was evident that he did not intend to be present at the drawing,
as he was at his house in Drammen the night before; but feeling his
sister's arm tremble in his, Joel led her swiftly on, without trying
to hear any more.

As for Sylvius Hogg, they had hoped to meet him in the street; but
in this they were disappointed, though an occasional remark satisfied
them that the public was already aware of the professor's return, for
early in the morning he had been seen hurrying toward the wharves, and
afterward in the direction of the Naval Department.

Of course, Joel might have asked anybody where Professor Sylvius Hogg
lived. Any one would have been only too delighted to point out the
house or even to accompany him to it; but he did not ask, for fear of
being indiscreet, and as the professor had promised to meet them at
the hotel, it would be better to wait until the appointed hour.

After a time Hulda began to feel very tired, and requested her brother
to take her back to the hotel, especially as these discussions, in
which her name was frequently mentioned, were very trying to her, and
on reaching the house she went straight up to her own room to await
the arrival of Sylvius Hogg.

Joel remained in the reading-room, on the lower floor, where he spent
his time in mechanically looking over the Christiania papers. Suddenly
he turned pale, a mist obscured his vision, and the paper fell from
his hands.

In the "Morgen-Blad," under the heading of Maritime Intelligence, he
had just seen the following cablegram from Newfoundland:

    "The dispatch-boat 'Telegraph' has reached the locality where
    the 'Viking' is supposed to have been lost, but has found no
    trace of the wreck. The search on the coast of Greenland has
    been equally unsuccessful, so it may be considered almost
    certain that none of the unfortunate ship's crew survived the
    catastrophe."




CHAPTER XVIII.


"Good-morning, Mr. Benett. It is always a great pleasure to me when I
have an opportunity to shake hands with you."

"And for me, professor, it is a great honor."

"Honor, pleasure--pleasure, honor," laughed the professor. "One
balances the other."

"I am glad to see that your journey through Central Norway has been
safely accomplished."

"Not accomplished, only concluded, for this year."

"But tell me, pray, all about those good people you met at Dal."

"Excellent people they were, friend Benett, in every sense of the
word."

"From what I can learn through the papers they are certainly very much
to be pitied."

"Unquestionably, Mr. Benett. I have never known misfortune to pursue
persons so relentlessly."

"It seems so, indeed, professor; for right after the loss of the
'Viking' came that miserable Sandgoist affair."

"True, Mr. Benett."

"Still, Mr. Hogg, I think Hulda Hansen did right to give up the ticket
under the circumstances."

"Indeed! and why, if you please?"

"Because it is better to secure fifteen thousand marks than to run a
very great risk of gaining nothing at all."

"You talk like the practical business man and merchant that you are;
but if you choose to look at the matter from another point of view, it
becomes a matter of sentiment, and money exerts very little influence
in such cases."

"Of course, Mr. Hogg, but permit me to remark that it is more than
likely that your protégée has profited greatly by the exchange."

"Why do you think so?"

"But think of it. What does this ticket represent? One chance in a
million of winning."

"Yes, one chance in a million. That is very small; it is true, Mr.
Benett, very small."

"Yes; and consequently such a reaction has followed the late madness
that it is said that this Sandgoist who purchased the ticket to
speculate upon it has been unable to find a purchaser."

"So I have heard."

"And yet, if that rascally usurer should win the grand prize, what a
shame it would be!"

"A shame, most assuredly, Mr. Benett; the word is not too strong--a
shame, unquestionably."

This conversation took place while Sylvius Hogg was walking through
the establishment of M. Benett--an establishment well known in
Christiania, and indeed throughout Norway. It is difficult to mention
an article that can not be found in this bazaar. Traveling-carriages,
kariols by the dozen, canned goods, baskets of wine, preserves of
every kind, clothing and utensils for tourists, and guides to conduct
them to the remotest villages of Finmark, Lapland, or even to the
North Pole. Nor is this all. M. Benett likewise offers to lovers of
natural history specimens of the different stones and metals found in
the earth, as well as of the birds, insects, and reptiles of Norway.
It is well, too, to know that one can nowhere find a more complete
assortment of the jewelry and bric-à-brac of the country than in his
show-cases.

This gentleman is consequently the good angel of all tourists desirous
of exploring the Scandinavian peninsula, and a man Christiania could
scarcely do without.

"By the way, you found the carriage you had ordered waiting for you at
Tinoset, did you not, professor?" he asked.

"Yes. Having ordered it through you, Monsieur Benett, I felt sure that
it would, be there at the appointed time."

"You are a sad flatterer, I fear, Monsieur Hogg. But I judged from
your letter that there were to be three of you in the party."

"There were three of us, as I told you."

"And the others?"

"They arrived here safe and sound last evening, and are now waiting
for me at the Hotel du Nord, where I am soon to join them."

"And these persons are--?"

"Precisely, Monsieur Benett, precisely; but I must beg you to say
nothing about it. I don't wish their arrival to be noised abroad yet."

"Poor girl!"

"Yes, she has suffered terribly."

"And you wish her to be present at the drawing, though the ticket her
betrothed bequeathed to her is no longer in her possession?"

"It is not my wish, Monsieur Benett, but that of Ole Kamp, and I
say to you as I have said to others, Ole Kamp's last wishes would be
obeyed."

"Unquestionably. What you do is not only right, but always for the
best, professor."

"You are flattering me now, dear Monsieur Benett."

"Not at all. But it was a lucky day for them when the Hansen family
made your acquaintance."

"Nonsense! it was a much more fortunate thing for me that they crossed
my path."

"I see that you have the same kind heart still."

"Well, as one is obliged to have a heart it is best to have a good
one, isn't it?" retorted the professor, with a genial smile. "But you
needn't suppose that I came here merely in search of compliments," he
continued. "It was for an entirely different object, I assure you."

"Believe me, I am quite at your service."

"You are aware, I suppose, that but for the timely intervention of
Joel and Hulda Hansen, the Rjukanfos would never have yielded me up
alive, and I should not have the pleasure of seeing you to-day?"

"Yes, yes, I know," replied Mr. Benett. "The papers have published
full accounts of your adventure, and those courageous young people
really deserve to win the capital prize."

"That is my opinion," answered Sylvius Hogg, "but as that is quite out
of the question now, I am unwilling for my friend Hulda to return
to Dal without some little gift as a sort of memento of her visit to
Christiania."

"That is certainly an excellent idea, Mr. Hogg."

"So you must assist me in selecting something that would be likely to
please a young girl."

"Very willingly," responded Mr. Benett. And he forthwith invited the
professor to step into the jewelry department, for was not a Norwegian
ornament the most charming souvenir that one could take away with one
from Christiania and from Mr. Benett's wonderful establishment?

Such at least was the opinion of Sylvius Hogg when the genial merchant
exhibited the contents of his show-cases.

"As I am no connoisseur in such matters I must be guided by your
taste, Mr. Benett," he remarked.

They had before them a very large and complete assortment of
native jewelry, which is usually valuable rather by reason of the
elaborateness of its workmanship than any costliness of material.

"What is this?" inquired the professor.

"It is a ring with pendants which emit a very pleasant sound."

"It is certainly very pretty," replied Sylvius Hogg, trying the bauble
on the tip of his little finger. "Lay it aside, Mr. Benett, and let us
look at something else."

"Bracelets or necklaces?"

"At a little of everything, if you please, Mr. Benett--a little of
everything. What is this?"

"A set of ornaments for the corsage. Look at that delicate tracery of
copper upon a red worsted groundwork. It is all in excellent taste,
though not very expensive."

"The effect is certainly charming, Mr. Benett. Lay the ornaments aside
with the ring."

"But I must call your attention to the fact that these ornaments are
reserved for the adornment of youthful brides on their wedding-day,
and that--"

"By Saint Olaf! you are right. Mr. Benett, you are quite right. Poor
Hulda! Unfortunately it is not Ole who is making her this present,
but myself, and it is not to a blushing bride that I am going to offer
it."

"True, true, Mr. Hogg."

"Let me look then at some jewelry suitable for a young girl. How about
this cross, Mr. Benett?"

"It is to be worn as a pendant, and being cut in concave facets it
sparkles brilliantly with every movement of the wearer's throat."

"It is very pretty, very pretty, indeed, and you can lay it aside
with the other articles, Mr. Benett. When we have gone through all the
show-cases we will make our selection."

"Yes, but--"

"What is the matter now?"

"This cross, too, is intended to be worn by Scandinavian brides on
their marriage-day."

"The deuce! friend Benett. I am certainly very unfortunate in my
selections."

"The fact is, professor, my stock is composed principally of bridal
jewelry, as that meets with the readiest sale. You can scarcely wonder
at that."

"The fact doesn't surprise me at all, Mr. Benett, though it places me
in a rather embarrassing position."

"Oh, well, you can still take the ring you asked me to put aside."

"Yes, but I should like some more showy ornament."

"Then take this necklace of silver filigree with its four rows of
chains which will have such a charming effect upon the neck of a young
girl. See! it is studded with gems of every hue, and it is certainly
one of the most quaint and curious productions of the Norwegian
silversmiths."

"Yes, yes," replied Sylvius Hogg. "It is a pretty ornament, though
perhaps rather showy for my modest Hulda. Indeed, I much prefer the
corsage ornaments you showed me just now, and the pendant. Are they
so especially reserved for brides that they can not be presented to a
young girl?"

"I think the Storthing has as yet passed no law to that effect,"
replied Mr. Benett. "It is an unpardonable oversight, probably, but--"

"Well, well, it shall be attended to immediately, Mr. Benett. In the
meantime I will take the cross and corsage ornaments. My little
Hulda may marry some day after all. Good and charming as she is she
certainly will not want for an opportunity to utilize these ornaments,
so I will buy them and take them away with me."

"Very well, very well, professor."

"Shall we have the pleasure of seeing you at the drawing, friend
Benett?"

"Certainly."

"I think it will be a very interesting affair."

"I am sure of it."

"But look here," exclaimed the professor, bending over a show-case,
"here are two very pretty rings I did not notice before."

"Oh, they wouldn't suit you, Mr. Hogg. These are the heavily chased
rings that the pastor places upon the finger of the bride and the
groom during the marriage ceremony."

"Indeed? Ah, well, I will take them all the same. And now I must bid
you good-bye, Mr. Benett, though I hope to see you again very soon."

Sylvius Hogg now left the establishment, and walked briskly in the
direction of the Hotel du Nord.

On entering the vestibule his eyes fell upon the words _Fiat lux_,
which are inscribed upon the hall lamp.

"Ah! these Latin words are certainly very appropriate," he said to
himself, "Yes. _Fiat lux! Fiat lux!_"

Hulda was still in her room, sitting by the window. The professor
rapped at the door, which was instantly opened.

"Oh. Monsieur Sylvius!" cried the girl, delightedly.

"Yes, here I am, here I am! But never mind about Monsieur Sylvius
now; our attention must be devoted to breakfast, which is ready and
waiting. I'm as hungry as a wolf. Where is Joel?"

"In the reading-room."

"Well, I will go in search of him. You, my dear child, must come right
down and join us."

Sylvius Hogg left the room and went to find Joel, who was also waiting
for him, but in a state of mind bordering upon despair. The poor
fellow immediately showed the professor the copy of the "Morgen-Blad,"
containing the discouraging telegram from the commander of the
"Telegraph."

"Hulda has not seen it, I hope?" inquired the professor, hastily.

"No, I thought it better to conceal from her as long as possible what
she will learn only too soon."

"You did quite right, my boy. Let us go to breakfast."

A moment afterward all three were seated at a table in a private
dining-room, and Sylvius Hogg began eating with great zest.

An excellent breakfast it was, equal in fact to any dinner, as you
can judge from the _menu_. Cold beer soup, salmon with egg sauce,
delicious veal cutlets, rare roast beef, a delicate salad, vanilla
ice, raspberry and cherry preserver--the whole moistened with some
very fine claret.

"Excellent, excellent!" exclaimed Sylvius Hogg. "Why, we can almost
imagine ourselves in Dame Hansen's inn at Dal."

And as his mouth was otherwise occupied his eyes smiled as much as it
is possible for eyes to smile.

Joel and Hulda endeavored to reply in the same strain, but they could
not, and the poor girl tasted scarcely anything. When the repast was
concluded:

"My children," said Sylvius Hogg, "you certainly failed to do justice
to a very excellent breakfast. Still, I can not compel you to eat, and
if you go without breakfast you are likely to enjoy your dinner all
the more, while I very much doubt if I shall be able to compete with
you to-night. Now, it is quite time for us to leave the table."

The professor was already upon his feet, and he was about to take the
hat Joel handed him, when Hulda checked him by saying:

"Monsieur Sylvius, do you still insist that I shall accompany you?"

"To witness the drawing? Certainly I do, my dear girl."

"But it will be a very painful ordeal for me."

"I admit it, but Ole wished you to be present at the drawing, Hulda,
and Ole's wishes must be obeyed."

This phrase was certainly becoming a sort of refrain in Sylvius Hogg's
mouth.




CHAPTER XIX.


What a crowd filled the large hall of the University of Christiana in
which the drawing of the great lottery was to take place--a crowd that
overflowed into the very court-yards, as even the immense building
was not large enough to accommodate such a throng, and even into the
adjoining streets, as the court-yards, too, proved inadequate toward
the last.

On that Sunday, the 15th of July, it certainly was not by their
calmness and phlegm that one would have recognized these madly excited
people as Norwegians. Was this unwonted excitement due solely to
the interest excited by this drawing, or was it due, at least, in a
measure, to the unusually high temperature of the summer's day?

The drawing was to begin at three o'clock precisely. There were one
hundred prizes--divided into three classes: 1st, ninety prizes ranging
in value from one hundred to one thousand marks, and amounting in all
to forty-five thousand marks; 2d, nine prizes of from one thousand to
nine thousand marks, and amounting to forty-five thousand marks, and
3d, one prize of one hundred thousand marks.

Contrary to the rule that is generally observed in lotteries of this
kind, the drawing of the grand prize was reserved for the last. It was
not to the holder of the first ticket drawn that the grand prize would
be given, but to the last, that is to say, the one hundredth. Hence,
there would result a series of emotions and heart-throbbings of
constantly increasing violence, for it had been decided that no ticket
should be entitled to two prizes, but that having gained one prize,
the drawing should be considered null and void if the same number were
taken from the urns a second time.

All this was known to the public, and there was nothing for people
to do but await the appointed hour; but to while away the tedious
interval of waiting they all talked, and, chiefly, of the pathetic
situation of Hulda Hansen. Unquestionably, if she had still been the
possessor of Ole Kamp's ticket each individual present would have
wished her the next best luck to himself.

Several persons having seen the dispatch published in the
"Morgen-Blad," spoke of it to their neighbors, and the entire crowd
soon became aware that the search of the "Telegraph" had proved
futile. This being the case all felt that there was no longer any hope
of finding even a vestige of the lost "Viking." Not one of the crew
could have survived the shipwreck, and Hulda would never see her lover
again.

Suddenly another report diverted the minds of the crowd. It was
rumored that Sandgoist had decided to leave Drammen, and several
persons pretended that they had seen him in the streets of
Christiania. Could it be that he had ventured into this hall? If
he had the wretch would certainly meet with a most unflattering
reception. How audacious in him to think of such a thing as being
present at this drawing! It was so improbable that it could not be
possible. It must certainly be a false alarm, and nothing more.

About quarter past two quite a commotion was apparent in the crowd.

It was caused by the sudden appearance of Sylvius Hogg at the gate of
the University. Every one knew the prominent part he had taken in the
whole affair, and how, after having been received by Dame Hansen's
children, he had endeavored to repay the obligation, so the crowd
instantly divided to make way for him, and there arose from every
side a flattering murmur, which Sylvius acknowledged by a series of
friendly bows, and this murmur soon changed into hearty applause.

But the professor was not alone. When those nearest him stepped back
to make way for him they saw that he had a young girl on his arm, and
that a young man was following them.

A young man! a young girl! The discovery had very much the effect of
an electric shock. The same thought flashed through every mind like a
spark from an electric battery.

"Hulda! Hulda Hansen!"

This was the name that burst from every lip.

Yes, it was Hulda, so deeply agitated that she could hardly walk.
Indeed, she certainly would have fallen had it not been for Sylvius
Hogg's supporting arm. But it upheld her firmly--her, the modest,
heart-broken little heroine of the fête to which Ole Kamp's presence
only was wanting. How greatly she would have preferred to remain in
her own little room at Dal! How she shrunk from this curiosity on the
part of those around her, sympathizing though it was! But Sylvius Hogg
had wished her to come, and she had done so.

"Room! room!" was heard on all sides.

And as Sylvius Hogg, and Hulda and Joel walked up the passage-way that
had been cleared for them, as if by magic, how many friendly hands
were outstretched to grasp theirs, how many kind and cordial words
were lavished upon them, and with what delight Sylvius Hogg listened
to these expressions of friendly feeling!

"Yes; it is she, my friends, my little Hulda, whom I have brought back
with me from Dal," said he. "And this is Joel, her noble brother; but
pray, my good friends, do not smother them!"

Though Joel returned every grasp with interest, the less vigorous
hands of the professor were fairly benumbed by such constant shaking,
but his eyes sparkled with joy, though a tear was stealing down his
cheek; but--and the phenomenon was certainly well worthy the attention
of ophthalmologists--the tear was a luminous one.

It took them fully a quarter of an hour to cross the court-yard, gain
the main hall, and reach the seats that had been reserved for
the professor. When this was at last accomplished, not without
considerable difficulty, Sylvius Hogg seated himself between Hulda and
Joel.

At precisely half past two o'clock, the door at the rear of the
platform opened, and the president of the lottery appeared, calm
and dignified, and with the commanding mien befitting his exalted
position. Two directors followed, bearing themselves with equal
dignity. Then came six little blue-eyed girls, decked out in flowers
and ribbons, six little girls whose innocent hands were to draw the
lottery.

Their entrance was greeted with a burst of loud applause that
testified both to the pleasure all experienced on beholding the
managers of the Christiania Lottery, and to the impatience with which
the crowd was awaiting the beginning of the drawing.

There were six little girls, as we have remarked before, and there
were also six urns upon a table that occupied the middle of the
platform. Each of these urns contained ten numbers: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 0, representing the units, tens, hundreds, thousands, tens of
thousands, and hundreds of thousands of the number one million. There
was no seventh urn, for the million column, because it had been agreed
that six ciphers drawn simultaneously should represent one million, as
in this way the chances of success would be equally divided among all
the numbers.

It had also been settled that the numbers should be drawn in
succession from the urns, beginning with that to the left of the
audience. The winning number would thus be formed under the very eyes
of the spectators, first by the figure in the column of hundreds of
thousands, then in the columns of tens of thousands, and so on until
the column of units was reached, and the reader can judge with what
emotion each person watched his chances of success increase with the
drawing of each figure.

As the clock struck three, the president waved his hand, and declared
the drawing begun.

The prolonged murmur that greeted the announcement lasted several
minutes, after which quiet was gradually established.

The president rose, and though evidently much excited, made a short
speech suited to the occasion, in which he expressed regret that there
was not a prize for each ticket-holder; then he ordered the drawing
of the first series of prizes, which consisted, as we have before
remarked, of ninety prizes, and which would therefore consume a
considerable length of time.

The six little girls began to perform their duties with automaton-like
regularity, but the audience did not lose patience for an instant. It
is true, however, that as the value of the prizes increased with each
drawing, the excitement increased proportionately, and no one thought
of leaving his seat, not even those persons whose tickets had been
already drawn, and who had consequently nothing more to expect.

This went on for about an hour without producing any incident of
particular interest, though people noticed that number 9672 had not
been drawn, which would have taken away all chance of its winning the
capital prize.

"That is a good omen for Sandgoist!" remarked one of the professor's
neighbors.

"It would certainly be an extraordinary thing if a man like that
should meet with such a piece of good luck, even though he has the
famous ticket," remarked another.

"A famous ticket, indeed!" replied Sylvius Hogg; "but don't ask me
why, for I can't possibly tell you."

Then began the drawing of the second series of prizes, nine in number.
This promised to be very interesting--the ninety-first prize being one
of a thousand marks; the ninety-second, one of two thousand marks,
and so on, up to the ninety-ninth, which was one of nine thousand. The
third class, the reader must recollect, consisted of the capital prize
only.

Number 72,521 won a prize of five thousand marks. This ticket belonged
to a worthy seaman of Christiania, who was loudly cheered and who
received with great dignity the congratulations lavished upon him.

Another number, 823,752, won a prize of six thousand marks, and how
great was Sylvius Hogg's delight when he learned from Joel that it
belonged to the charming Siegfrid of Bamble.

An incident that caused no little excitement followed. When the
ninety-seventh prize was drawn, the one consisting of seven thousand
marks, the audience feared for a moment that Sandgoist was the winner
of it. It was won, however, by ticket number 9627, which was within
only forty-five points of Ole Kamp's number.

The two drawings that followed were numbers very widely removed from
each other: 775 and 76,287.

The second series was now concluded, and the great prize of one
hundred thousand marks alone remained to be drawn.

The excitement of the assemblage at that moment beggars all
description.

At first there was a long murmur that extended from the large hall
into the court-yards and even into the street. In fact, several
minutes elapsed before quiet was restored. A profound silence
followed, and in this calmness there was a certain amount of
stupor--the stupor one experiences on seeing a prisoner appear upon
the place of execution. But this time the still unknown victim was
only condemned to win a prize of one hundred thousand marks, not to
lose his head; that is, unless he lost it from ecstasy.

Joel sat with folded arms, gazing straight ahead of him, being the
least moved, probably, in all that large assembly. Hulda, her head
bowed upon her breast, was thinking only of her poor Ole. As for
Sylvius Hogg--but any attempt to describe the state of mind in which
Sylvius Hogg found himself would be worse than useless.

"We will now conclude with the drawing of the one hundred thousand
mark prize," announced the president.

What a voice! It seemed to proceed from the inmost depths of this
solemn-looking man, probably because he was the owner of several
tickets which, not having yet been drawn, might still win the capital
prize.

The first little girl drew a number from the left urn, and exhibited
it to the audience.

"Zero!" said the president.

The zero did not create much of a sensation, however. The audience
somehow seemed to have been expecting it.

"Zero!" said the president, announcing the figure drawn by the second
little girl.

Two zeros. The chances were evidently increasing for all numbers
between one and nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine, and every
one recollected that Ole Kamp's ticket bore the number 9672.

Strange to say, Sylvius Hogg began to move restlessly about in his
chair, as if he had suddenly been stricken with palsy.

"Nine," said the president, stating the number the third little girl
had just extracted from the third urn.

Nine! That was the first figure on Ole Kamp's ticket.

"Six!" said the president.

For the fourth little girl was timidly displaying a six to all the
eyes riveted upon her.

The chances of winning were now one out of a hundred for all the
numbers from one to ninety-nine, inclusive.

Could it be that this ticket of Ole Kamp's was to be the means of
placing one hundred thousand marks in that villainous Sandgoist's
pocket. Really such a result would almost make one doubt the justice
of God!

The fifth little girl plunged her hand into the next urn, and drew out
the fifth figure.

"Seven!" said the president, in a voice that trembled so as to be
scarcely audible, even to those seated on the first row of benches.

But those who could not hear were able to see for themselves, for the
five little girls were now holding up the following figures to the
gaze of the audience:

00967.

The winning number consequently must be one between 9670 and 9679, so
there was now one chance out of ten for Ole Kamp's ticket to win the
prize.

The suspense was at its height.

Sylvius Hogg had risen to his feet, and seized Hulda Hansen's hand.
Every eye was riveted upon the young girl. In sacrificing this last
momento of her betrothed, had she also sacrificed the fortune Ole Kamp
had coveted for her and for himself?

The sixth little girl had some difficulty getting her hand into
the urn, she was trembling so, poor thing! but at last the figure
appeared.

"Two!" exclaimed the president, sinking back in his chair, quite
breathless with emotion.

"Nine thousand six hundred and seventy two!" proclaimed one of the
directors, in a loud voice.

This was the number of Ole Kamp's ticket, now in Sandgoist's
possession. Everybody was aware of this fact, and of the manner in
which the usurer had obtained it; so there was a profound silence
instead of the tumultuous applause that would have filled the hall of
the University if the ticket had still been in Hulda Hansen's hands.

And now was this scoundrel Sandgoist about to step forward, ticket in
hand, to claim the prize?

"Number 9672 wins the prize of one hundred thousand marks!" repeated
the director. "Who claims it?"

"I do."

Was it the usurer of Drammen who answered thus?

No. It was a young man--a young man with a pale face, whose features
and whole person bore marks of prolonged suffering, but alive, really
and truly alive.

On hearing this voice, Hulda sprung to her feet, uttering a cry that
penetrated every nook and corner of the large hall; then she fell back
fainting.

But the young man had forced his way impetuously through the crowd,
and it was he who caught the unconscious girl in his arms.

It was Ole Kamp!




CHAPTER XX.


Yes; it was Ole Kamp! Ole Kamp, who, by a miracle, had survived the
shipwreck of the "Viking." The reason the "Telegraph" had not brought
him back to Europe can be easily explained. He was no longer in the
region visited by the dispatch-boat, for the very good reason that
he was already on his way to Christiania on board the vessel that had
rescued him.

This is what Sylvius Hogg was telling. This is what he repeated to all
who would listen to him. And what a crowd of listeners he had! This
is what he related with the triumphant accents of a conqueror! Those
around him repeated it to those who were not fortunate enough to be
near him, and the good news flew from group to group until it reached
the crowd that filled the court-yard and the neighboring streets.

In a few moments, all Christiania knew that the young mate of the
"Viking" had returned, and that he had won the grand prize of the
Schools Lottery.

It was a fortunate thing that Sylvius Hogg was acquainted with the
whole story, as Ole certainly could not have told it, for Joel nearly
smothered him in his embrace while Hulda was regaining consciousness.

"Hulda! dearest Hulda!" said Ole. "Yes, it is I--your betrothed--soon
to be your husband!"

"Yes, soon, my children, very soon!" exclaimed Sylvius Hogg. "We will
leave this very evening for Dal. And if such a thing was never seen
before, it will be seen now. A professor of law, and a member of the
Storthing will be seen dancing at a wedding like the wildest youth in
the Telemark."

But how had Sylvius Hogg become acquainted with Ole Kamp's history?
Simply through the last letter that the Naval Department had addressed
to him at Dal. In fact this letter--the last he had received, and
one whose receipt he had not mentioned to any one--contained another
letter, dated from Christiansand. This second letter stated that the
Danish brig "Genius" had just reached Christiansand, with several
survivors of the "Viking" on board, among them the young mate, Ole
Kamp, who would arrive in Christiania three days afterward.

The letter from the Naval Department added that these shipwrecked men
had suffered so much that they were still in a very weak condition,
and for this reason Sylvius Hogg had decided not to say anything to
Hulda about her lover's return. In his response he had also requested
the most profound secrecy in regard to this return--and in compliance
with this request the facts had been carefully kept from the public.

The fact that the "Telegraph" had found no traces nor survivors of the
"Viking" can also be easily explained.

During a violent tempest the vessel--which had become partially
disabled--being obliged to scud along before the wind in a
north-westerly direction, finally found herself about two hundred
miles from the southern coast of Iceland. During the nights of the
third and fourth of May the worst nights of the gale--it collided
with one of those enormous icebergs that drift down from the shores
of Greenland. The shock was terrible, so terrible, indeed, that the
"Viking" went to pieces five minutes afterward.

It was then that Ole hastily penned his farewell message to his
betrothed, and after inclosing it in a bottle, cast it into the sea.

Most of the "Viking's" crew, including the captain, perished at
the time of the catastrophe, but Ole Kamp and four of his comrades
succeeded in leaping upon the iceberg, just as the vessel went down;
but their death would have been none the less certain if the terrible
gale had not driven the mass of ice in a north-westerly direction. Two
days afterward, exhausted and nearly dead with hunger, these survivors
of the catastrophe were cast upon the southern coast of Greenland--a
barren and deserted region--but where they nevertheless managed to
keep themselves alive through the mercy of God.

If help had not reached them in a few days, it would have been all
over with them, however; for they had not strength to reach the
fisheries, or the Danish settlements on the other coast.

Fortunately the brig "Genius," which had been driven out of her course
by the tempest, happened to pass. The shipwrecked men made signals to
her. These signals were seen, and the men were saved.

The "Genius," delayed by head-winds, was a long time in making the
comparatively short voyage between Greenland and Norway, and did not
reach Christiansand until the 12th of July, nor Christiania until the
morning of the 15th.

That very morning Sylvius Hogg went aboard the vessel. There he found
Ole, who was still very weak, and told him all that had taken
place since the arrival of his last letter, written from
Saint-Pierre-Miquelon, after which he took the young sailor home with
him, though not without having requested the crew of the "Genius" to
keep the secret a few hours longer. The reader knows the rest.

It was then decided that Ole Kamp should attend the drawing of the
lottery. But would he be strong enough to do it?

Yes; his strength would be equal to the ordeal, for was not Hulda
to be there? But had he still any interest in this drawing? Yes, a
hundred times, yes; both on his own account and that of his
betrothed, for Sylvius Hogg had succeeded in getting the ticket out
of Sandgoist's hands, having repurchased it from him at the same
price the usurer had given for it, for Sandgoist was only too glad to
dispose of it at that price now there were no more bidders for it.

"It was not for the sake of an improbable chance of gain that I wished
to restore it to Hulda, my brave Ole," Sylvius Hogg remarked, as
he gave him the ticket; "but because it was a last farewell you had
addressed to her at the moment when you believed all was lost."

And now it seemed almost as if Professor Sylvius Hogg had been
inspired of Heaven, certainly much more so than Sandgoist, who was
strongly tempted to dash his brains out against the wall when he
learned the result of the drawing. And now there was a fortune of one
hundred thousand marks in the Hansen family. Yes, one hundred thousand
marks, for Sylvius Hogg absolutely refused to take back the money he
had paid to secure possession of Ole Kamp's ticket.

It was a dowry he was only too glad to offer little Hulda on her
wedding-day.

Perhaps it will be considered rather astonishing that Ticket No. 9672,
which had attracted so much attention from the public, should have
happened to be the one that drew the grand prize.

Yes, it was astonishing, we must admit; but it was not impossible, and
at all events, such was the fact.

Sylvius Hogg, Joel, and Hulda left Christiania that same evening.
They returned to Dal by way of Bamble, as, of course, Siegfrid must
be informed of her good fortune. As they passed the little church of
Hitterdal, Hulda recollected the gloomy thoughts that beset her
two days before, but the sight of Ole, seated beside her, speedily
recalled her to the blissful reality.

By Saint Olaf! how beautiful Hulda looked under her bridal crown when
she left the little chapel at Dal, four days afterward, leaning on her
husband's arm. The brilliant festivities that followed were the talk
of the whole Telemark for days and days afterward. And how happy
everybody was! Siegfrid, the pretty bride-maid, her father, Farmer
Helmboe, Joel, her affianced husband, and even Dame Hansen, who was no
longer haunted by a fear of Sandgoist.

Perhaps the reader will ask whether all these friends and
guests--Messrs. Help Bros., and hosts of others--came to witness
the happiness of the newly married couple, or to see Sylvius Hogg,
professor of law and a member of the Storthing, dance. It is hard to
say. At all events he did dance, and very creditably, and after having
opened the ball with his beloved Hulda, he closed it with the charming
Siegfrid.

The next day, followed by the acclamations of the whole valley of
Vesjorddal, he departed, but not without having solemnly promised
to return for Joel's marriage, which was celebrated a few weeks
afterward, to the great delight of the contracting parties.

This time the professor opened the ball with the charming Siegfrid,
and closed it with his dear Hulda; and he has never given any display
of his proficiency in the terpsichorean art since that time.

What happiness now reigned in this household which had been so cruelly
tried! It was undoubtedly due in some measure, at least, to the
efforts of Sylvius Hogg; but he would not admit it, and always
declared:

"No, no; it is I who am still under obligations to Dame Hansen's
children."

As for the famous ticket, it was returned to Ole Kamp after the
drawing; and now, in a neat wooden frame, it occupies the place of
honor in the hall of the inn at Dal. But what the visitor sees is not
the side of the ticket upon which the famous number 9672 is inscribed,
but the last farewell that the shipwrecked sailor, Ole Kamp, addressed
to Hulda Hansen, his betrothed.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TICKET NO. "9672"***


******* This file should be named 13527-8.txt or 13527-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/5/2/13527



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
CHAPTER I.

THE "PILGRIM."


On the 2nd of February, 1873, the "Pilgrim," a tight little craft of
400 tons burden, lay in lat. 43° 57', S. and long. 165° 19', W. She was
a schooner, the property of James W. Weldon, a wealthy Californian
ship-owner who had fitted her out at San Francisco, expressly for the
whale-fisheries in the southern seas.

James Weldon was accustomed every season to send his whalers both to
the Arctic regions beyond Behring Straits, and to the Antarctic Ocean
below Tasmania and Cape Horn; and the "Pilgrim," although one of the
smallest, was one of the best-going vessels of its class; her
sailing-powers were splendid, and her rigging was so adroitly adapted
that with a very small crew she might venture without risk within sight
of the impenetrable ice-fields of the southern hemisphere: under
skilful guidance she could dauntlessly thread her way amongst the
drifting ice-bergs that, lessened though they were by perpetual shocks
and undermined by warm currents, made their way northwards as far as
the parallel of New Zealand or the Cape of Good Hope, to a latitude
corresponding to which in the northern hemisphere they are never seen,
having already melted away in the depths of the Atlantic and Pacific
Oceans.

For several years the command of the "Pilgrim" had been entrusted to
Captain Hull, an experienced seaman, and one of the most dexterous
harpooners in Weldon's service. The crew consisted of five sailors and
an apprentice. This number, of course, was quite insufficient for the
process of whale-fishing, which requires a large contingent both for
manning the whale-boats and for cutting up the whales after they are
captured; but Weldon, following the example of other owners, found it
more economical to embark at San Francisco only just enough men to work
the ship to New Zealand, where, from the promiscuous gathering of
seamen of well-nigh every nationality, and of needy emigrants, the
captain had no difficulty in engaging as many whalemen as he wanted for
the season. This method of hiring men who could be at once discharged
when their services were no longer required had proved altogether to be
the most profitable and convenient.

The "Pilgrim" had now just completed her annual voyage to the Antarctic
circle. It was not, however, with her proper quota of oil-barrels full
to the brim, nor yet with an ample cargo of cut and uncut whalebone,
that she was thus far on her way back. The time, indeed, for a good
haul was past; the repeated and vigourous attacks upon the cetaceans
had made them very scarce; the whale known as "the Right whale," the
"Nord-kapper" of the northern fisheries, the "Sulpher-boltone" of the
southern, was hardly ever to be seen; and latterly the whalers had had
no alternative but to direct their efforts against the Finback or
Jubarte, a gigantic mammal, encounter with which is always attended
with considerable danger.

So scanty this year had been the supply of whales that Captain Hull had
resolved next year to push his way into far more southern latitudes;
even, if necessary, to advance to the regions known as Clarie and
Adélie Lands, of which the discovery, though claimed by the American
navigator Wilkes, belongs by right to the illustrious Frenchman Dumont
d'Urville, the commander of the "Astrolabe" and the "Zélee."

The season had been exceptionally unfortunate for the "Pilgrim." At the
beginning of January, almost in the height of the southern summer, long
before the ordinary time for the whalers' return, Captain Hull had been
obliged to abandon his fishing-quarters. His hired contingent, all men
of more than doubtful character, had given signs of such
insubordination as threatened to end in mutiny; and he had become aware
that he must part company with them on the earliest possible
opportunity. Accordingly, without delay, the bow of the "Pilgrim" was
directed to the northwest, towards New Zealand, which was sighted on
the 15th of January, and on reaching Waitemata, the port of Auckland,
in the Hauraki Gulf, on the east coast of North Island, the whole of
the gang was peremptorily discharged.

The ship's crew were more than dissatisfied. They were angry. Never
before had they returned with so meagre a haul. They ought to have had
at least two hundred barrels more. The captain himself experienced all
the mortification of an ardent sportsman who for the first time in his
life brings home a half-empty bag; and there was a general spirit of
animosity against the rascals whose rebellion had so entirely marred
the success of the expedition.

Captain Hull did everything in his power to repair the disappointment;
he made every effort to engage a fresh gang; but it was too late; every
available seaman had long since been carried off to the fisheries.
Finding therefore that all hope of making good the deficiency in his
cargo must be resigned, he was on the point of leaving Auckland, alone
with his crew, when he was met by a request with which he felt himself
bound to comply.

It had chanced that James Weldon, on one of those journeys which were
necessitated by the nature of his business, had brought with him his
wife, his son Jack, a child of five years of age, and a relation of the
family who was generally known by the name of Cousin Benedict. Weldon
had of course intended that his family should accompany him on his
return home to San Francisco; but little Jack was taken so seriously
ill, that his father, whose affairs demanded his immediate return, was
obliged to leave him behind at Auckland with his wife and Cousin
Benedict.

Three months had passed away, little Jack was convalescent, and Mrs.
Weldon, weary of her long separation from her husband, was anxious to
get home as soon as possible. Her readiest way of reaching San
Francisco was to cross to Australia, and thence to take a passage in
one of the vessels of the "Golden Age" Company, which run between
Melbourne and the Isthmus of Panama: on arriving in Panama she would
have to wait the departure of the next American steamer of the line
which maintains a regular communication between the Isthmus and
California. This route, however, involved many stoppages and changes,
such as are always disagreeable and inconvenient for women and
children, and Mrs. Weldon was hesitating whether she should encounter
the journey, when she heard that her husband's vessel, the "Pilgrim,"
had arrived at Auckland. Hastening to Captain Hull, she begged him to
take her with her little boy, Cousin Benedict, and Nan, an old negress
who had been her attendant from her childhood, on board the "Pilgrim,"
and to convey them to San Francisco direct.

"Was it not over hazardous," asked the captain, "to venture upon a
voyage of between 5000 and 6000 miles in so small a sailing-vessel?"

But Mrs. Weldon urged her request, and Captain Hull, confident in the
sea-going qualities of his craft, and anticipating at this season
nothing but fair weather on either side of the equator, gave his
consent.

In order to provide as far as possible for the comfort of the lady
during a voyage that must occupy from forty to fifty days, the captain
placed his own cabin at her entire disposal.

Everything promised well for a prosperous voyage. The only hindrance
that could be foreseen arose from the circumstance that the "Pilgrim"
would have to put in at Valparaiso for the purpose of unlading; but
that business once accomplished, she would continue her way along the
American coast with the assistance of the land breezes, which
ordinarily make the proximity of those shores such agreeable quarters
for sailing.

Mrs. Weldon herself had accompanied her husband in so many voyages,
that she was quite inured to all the makeshifts of a seafaring life,
and was conscious of no misgiving in embarking upon a vessel of such
small tonnage. She was a brave, high-spirited woman of about thirty
years of age, in the enjoyment of excellent health, and for her the sea
had no terrors. Aware that Captain Hull was an experienced man, in whom
her husband had the utmost confidence, and knowing that his ship was a
substantial craft, registered as one of the best of the American
whalers, so far from entertaining any mistrust as to her safety, she
only rejoiced in the opportuneness of the chance which seemed to offer
her a direct and unbroken route to her destination.

Cousin Benedict, as a matter of course, was to accompany her. He was
about fifty; but in spite of his mature age it would have been
considered the height of imprudence to allow him to travel anywhere
alone. Spare, lanky, with a bony frame, with an enormous cranium, and a
profusion of hair, he was one of those amiable, inoffensive _savants_
who, having once taken to gold spectacles, appear to have arrived at a
settled standard of age, and, however long they live afterwards, seem
never to be older than they have ever been.

Claiming a sort of kindredship with all the world, he was universally
known, far beyond the pale of his own connexions, by the name of
"Cousin Benedict." In the ordinary concerns of life nothing would ever
have rendered him capable of shifting for himself; of his meals he
would never think until they were placed before him; he had the
appearance of being utterly insensible to heat or cold; he vegetated
rather than lived, and might not inaptly be compared to a tree which,
though healthy enough at its core, produces scant foliage and no fruit.
His long arms and legs were in the way of himself and everybody else;
yet no one could possibly treat him with unkindness. As M. Prudhomme
would say, "if only he had been endowed with capability," he would have
rendered a service to any one in the world; but helplessness was his
dominant characteristic; helplessness was ingrained into his very
nature; yet this very helplessness made him an object of kind
consideration rather than of contempt, and Mrs. Weldon looked upon him
as a kind of elder brother to her little Jack.

It must not be supposed, however, that Cousin Benedict was either idle
or unoccupied. On the contrary, his whole time was devoted to one
absorbing passion for natural history. Not that he had any large claim
to be regarded properly as a natural historian; he had made no
excursions over the whole four districts of zoology, botany,
mineralogy, and geology, into which the realms of natural history are
commonly divided; indeed, he had no pretensions at all to be either a
botanist, a mineralogist, or a geologist; his studies only sufficed to
make him a zoologist, and that in a very limited sense. No Cuvier was
he; he did not aspire to decompose animal life by analysis, and to
recompose it by synthesis; his enthusiasm had not made him at all
deeply versed in vertebrata, mollusca, or radiata; in fact, the
vertebrata--animals, birds, reptiles, fishes--had had no place in his
researches; the mollusca--from the cephalopoda to the bryozia--had had
no attractions for him; nor had he consumed the midnight oil in
investigating the radiata, the echmodermata, acalephæ, polypi, entozoa,
or infusoria.

No; Cousin Benedict's interest began and ended with the articulata; and
it must be owned at once that his studies were very far from embracing
all the range of the six classes into which "articulata" are
subdivided; viz, the insecta, the mynapoda, the arachnida, the
crustacea, the cinhopoda, and the anelides; and he was utterly unable
in scientific language to distinguish a worm from a leech, an earwig
from a sea-acorn, a spider from a scorpion, a shrimp from a
frog-hopper, or a galley-worm from a centipede.

To confess the plain truth, Cousin Benedict was an amateur
entomologist, and nothing more.

Entomology, it may be asserted, is a wide science; it embraces the
whole division of the articulata; but our friend was an entomologist
only in the limited sense of the popular acceptation of the word; that
is to say, he was an observer and collector of insects, meaning by
"insects" those articulata which have bodies consisting of a number of
concentric movable rings, forming three distinct segments, each with a
pair of legs, and which are scientifically designated as hexapods.

[Illustration: Cousin Benedict]

To this extent was Cousin Benedict an entomologist; and when it is
remembered that the class of insecta of which he had grown up to be the
enthusiastic student comprises no less than ten[1] orders, and that of
these ten the coleoptera and diptera alone include 30,000 and 60,000
species respectively, it must be confessed that he had an ample field
for his most persevering exertions.


[Footnote 1: These ten orders are (1) the orthoptera, _e.g._
grasshoppers and crickets; (2) the neuroptera, _e.g._ dragon-flies; (3)
the hymenoptera, _e.g._ bees, wasps, and ants; (4) the lepidoptera,
_e.g._ butterflies and moths; (5) the hemiptera, _e.g._ cicadas and
fleas; (6) the coleoptera, _e.g._ cockchafers and glow-worms; (7) the
diptera, _e.g._ gnats and flies; (8) the rhipiptera, _e.g._ the
stylops; (9) the parasites, _e.g._ the acarus; and (10) the thysanura,
_e.g._ the lepisma and podura.]


Every available hour did he spend in the pursuit of his favourite
science: hexapods ruled his thoughts by day and his dreams by night.
The number of pins that he carried thick on the collar and sleeves of
his coat, down the front of his waistcoat, and on the crown of his hat,
defied computation; they were kept in readiness for the capture of
specimens that might come in his way, and on his return from a ramble
in the country he might be seen literally encased with a covering of
insects, transfixed adroitly by scientific rule.

This ruling passion of his had been the inducement that had urged him
to accompany Mr. and Mrs. Weldon to New Zealand. It had appeared to him
that it was likely to be a promising district, and now having been
successful in adding some rare specimens to his collection, he was
anxious to get back again to San Francisco, and to assign them their
proper places in his extensive cabinet.

Besides, it never occurred to Mrs. Weldon to start without him. To
leave him to shift for himself would be sheer cruelty. As a matter of
course whenever Mrs. Weldon went on board the "Pilgrim," Cousin
Benedict would go too.

Not that in any emergency assistance of any kind could be expected from
him; on the contrary, in the case of difficulty he would be an
additional burden; but there was every reason to expect a fair passage
and no cause of misgiving of any kind, so the propriety of leaving the
amiable entomologist behind was never suggested.

Anxious that she should be no impediment in the way of the due
departure of the "Pilgrim" from Waitemata, Mrs. Weldon made her
preparations with the utmost haste, discharged the servants which she
had temporarily engaged at Auckland, and accompanied by little Jack and
the old negress, and followed mechanically by Cousin Benedict, embarked
on the 22nd of January on board the schooner.

The amateur, however, kept his eye very scrupulously upon his own
special box. Amongst his collection of insects were some very
remarkable examples of new staphylins, a species of carnivorous
coleoptera with eyes placed above their head; it was a kind supposed to
be peculiar to New Caledonia. Another rarity which had been brought
under his notice was a venomous spider, known among the Maoris as a
"katipo;" its bite was asserted to be very often fatal. As a spider,
however, belongs to the order of the arachnida, and is not properly an
"insect," Benedict declined to take any interest in it. Enough for him
that he had secured a novelty in his own section of research; the
"Staphylin Neo-Zelandus" was not only the gem of his collection, but
its pecuniary value baffled ordinary estimate; he insured his box at a
fabulous sum, deeming it to be worth far more than all the cargo of oil
and whalebone in the "Pilgrim's" hold.

Captain Hull advanced to meet Mrs. Weldon and her party as they stepped
on deck.

"It must be understood, Mrs. Weldon," he said, courteously raising his
hat, "that you take this passage entirely on your own responsibility."

"Certainly, Captain Hull," she answered; "but why do you ask?"

"Simply because I have received no orders from Mr. Weldon," replied the
captain.

[Illustration: Captain Hull advanced to meet Mrs. Weldon and her party.]

"But my wish exonerates you," said Mrs. Weldon.

"Besides," added Captain Hull, "I am unable to provide you with the
accommodation and the comfort that you would have upon a passenger
steamer."

"You know well enough, captain," remonstrated the lady "that my husband
would not hesitate for a moment to trust his wife and child on board
the 'Pilgrim.'"

"Trust, madam! No! no more than I should myself. I repeat that the
'Pilgrim' cannot afford you the comfort to which you are accustomed."

Mrs. Weldon smiled.

"Oh, I am not one of your grumbling travellers. I shall have no
complaints to make either of small cramped cabins, or of rough and
meagre food."

She took her son by the hand, and passing on, begged that they might
start forthwith.

Orders accordingly were given; sails were trimmed; and after taking the
shortest course across the gulf, the "Pilgrim" turned her head towards
America.

Three days later strong easterly breezes compelled the schooner to tack
to larboard in order to get to windward. The consequence was that by
the 2nd of February the captain found himself in such a latitude that
he might almost be suspected of intending to round Cape Horn rather
than of having a design to coast the western shores of the New
Continent.

Still, the sea did not become rough. There was a slight delay, but, on
the whole, navigation was perfectly easy.




CHAPTER II.

THE APPRENTICE.


There was no poop upon the "Pilgrim's" deck, so that Mrs. Weldon had no
alternative than to acquiesce in the captain's proposal that she should
occupy his own modest cabin.

Accordingly, here she was installed with Jack and old Nan; and here she
took all her meals, in company with the captain and Cousin Benedict.

For Cousin Benedict tolerably comfortable sleeping accommodation had
been contrived close at hand, while Captain Hull himself retired to the
crew's quarter, occupying the cabin which properly belonged to the
chief mate, but as already indicated, the services of a second officer
were quite dispensed with.

All the crew were civil and attentive to the wife of their employer, a
master to whom they were faithfully attached. They were all natives of
the coast of California, brave and experienced seamen, and united by
tastes and habits in a common bond of sympathy. Few as they were in
number, their work was never shirked, not simply from the sense of
duty, but because they were directly interested in the profits of their
undertaking; the success of their labours always told to their own
advantage. The present expedition was the fourth that they had taken
together; and, as it turned out to be the first in which they had
failed to meet with success, it may be imagined that they were full of
resentment against the mutinous whalemen who had been the cause of so
serious a diminution of their ordinary gains.

[Illustration: Negoro.]

The only one on board who was not an American was a man who had been
temporarily engaged as cook. His name was Negoro; he was a Portuguese
by birth, but spoke English with perfect fluency. The previous cook had
deserted the ship at Auckland, and when Negoro, who was out of
employment, applied for the place, Captain Hull, only too glad to avoid
detention, engaged him at once without inquiry into his antecedents.
There was not the slightest fault to be found with the way in which the
cook performed his duties, but there was something in his manner, or
perhaps, rather in the expression of his countenance, which excited the
Captain's misgivings, and made him regret that he had not taken more
pains to investigate the character of one with whom he was now brought
into such close contact.

Negoro looked about forty years of age. Although he had the appearance
of being slightly built, he was muscular; he was of middle height, and
seemed to have a robust constitution; his hair was dark, his complexion
somewhat swarthy. His manner was taciturn, and although, from
occasional remarks that he dropped, it was evident that he had received
some education, he was very reserved on the subjects both of his family
and of his past life. No one knew where he had come from, and he
admitted no one to his confidence as to where he was going, except that
he made no secret of his intention to land at Valparaiso. His freedom
from sea-sickness demonstrated that this could hardly be his first
voyage, but on the other hand his complete ignorance of seamen's
phraseology made it certain that he had never been accustomed to his
present occupation. He kept himself aloof as much as possible from the
rest of the crew, during the day rarely leaving the great cast-iron
stove, which was out of proportion to the measurement of the cramped
little kitchen; and at night, as soon as the fire was extinguished,
took the earliest opportunity of retiring to his berth and going to
sleep.

It has been already stated that the crew of the "Pilgrim" consisted of
five seamen and an apprentice. This apprentice was Dick Sands.

Dick was fifteen years old; he was a foundling, his unknown parents
having abandoned him at his birth, and he had been brought up in a
public charitable institution. He had been called Dick, after the
benevolent passer-by who had discovered him when he was but an infant a
few hours old, and he had received the surname of Sands as a memorial
of the spot where he had been exposed, Sandy Hook, a point at the mouth
of the Hudson, where it forms an entrance to the harbour of New York.

As Dick was so young it was most likely he would yet grow a little
taller, but it did not seem probable that he would ever exceed middle
height, he looked too stoutly and strongly built to grow much. His
complexion was dark, but his beaming blue eyes attested, with scarcely
room for doubt, his Anglo-Saxon origin, and his countenance betokened
energy and intelligence. The profession that he had adopted seemed to
have equipped him betimes for fighting the battle of life.

Misquoted often as Virgil's are the words

  "Audaces fortuna juvat!"

but the true reading is

  "Audentes fortuna juvat!"

and, slight as the difference may seem, it is very significant. It is
upon the confident rather than the rash, the daring rather than the
bold, that Fortune sheds her smiles; the bold man often acts without
thinking, whilst the daring always thinks before he acts.

And Dick Sands was truly courageous; he was one of the daring. At
fifteen years old, an age at which few boys have laid aside the
frivolities of childhood, he had acquired the stability of a man, and
the most casual observer could scarcely fail to be attracted by his
bright, yet thoughtful countenance. At an early period of his life he
had realized all the difficulties of his position, and had made a
resolution, from which nothing tempted him to flinch, that he would
carve out for himself an honourable and independent career. Lithe and
agile in his movements, he was an adept in every kind of athletic
exercise; and so marvellous was his success in everything he undertook,
that he might almost be supposed to be one of those gifted mortals who
have two right hands and two left feet.

Until he was four years old the little orphan had found a home in one
of those institutions in America where forsaken children are sure of an
asylum, and he was subsequently sent to an industrial school supported
by charitable aid, where he learnt reading, writing, and arithmetic.
From the days of infancy he had never deviated from the expression of
his wish to be a sailor, and accordingly, as soon as he was eight, he
was placed as cabin-boy on board one of the ships that navigate the
Southern Seas. The officers all took a peculiar interest in him, and he
received, in consequence, a thoroughly good grounding in the duties and
discipline of a seaman's life. There was no room to doubt that he must
ultimately rise to eminence in his profession, for when a child from
the very first has been trained in the knowledge that he must gain his
bread by the sweat of his brow, it is comparatively rare that he lacks
the will to do so.

Whilst he was still acting as cabin-boy on one of those
trading-vessels, Dick attracted the notice of Captain Hull, who took a
fancy to the lad and introduced him to his employer. Mr. Weldon at once
took a lively interest in Dick's welfare, and had his education
continued in San Francisco, taking care that he was instructed in the
doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church, to which his own family
belonged.

Throughout his studies Dick Sands' favourite subjects were always those
which had a reference to his future profession; he mastered the details
of the geography of the world; he applied himself diligently to such
branches of mathematics as were necessary for the science of
navigation; whilst for recreation in his hours of leisure, he would
greedily devour every book of adventure in travel that came in his way.
Nor did he omit duly to combine the practical with the theoretical; and
when he was bound apprentice on board the "Pilgrim," a vessel not only
belonging to his benefactor, but under the command of his kind friend
Captain Hull, he congratulated himself most heartily, and felt that the
experience he should gain in the southern whale-fisheries could hardly
fail to be of service to him in after-life. A first-rate sailor ought
to be a first-rate fisherman too.

It was a matter of the greatest pleasure to Dick Sands when he heard to
his surprise that Mrs. Weldon was about to become a passenger on board
the "Pilgrim." His devotion to the family of his benefactor was large
and genuine. For several years Mrs. Weldon had acted towards him little
short of a mother's part, and for Jack, although he never forgot the
difference in their position, he entertained well-nigh a brother's
affection. His friends had the satisfaction of being assured that they
had sown the seeds of kindness on a generous soil, for there was no
room to doubt that the heart of the orphan boy was overflowing with
sincere gratitude. Should the occasion arise, ought he not, he asked,
to be ready to sacrifice everything in behalf of those to whom he was
indebted not only for his start in life, but for the knowledge of all
that was right and holy?

Confiding in the good principles of her protégé, Mrs. Weldon had no
hesitation in entrusting her little son to his especial charge. During
the frequent periods of leisure, when the sea was fair, and the sails
required no shifting, the apprentice was never weary of amusing Jack by
making him familiar with the practice of a sailor's craft; he made him
scramble up the shrouds, perch upon the yards, and slip down the
back-stays; and the mother had no alarm; her assurance of Dick Sands'
ability and watchfulness to protect her boy was so complete that she
could only rejoice in an occupation for him that seemed more than
anything to restore the colour he had lost in his recent illness.

Time passed on without incident; and had it not been for the constant
prevalence of an adverse wind, neither passengers nor crew could have
found the least cause of complaint. The pertinacity, however, with
which the wind kept to the east could not do otherwise than make
Captain Hull somewhat concerned; it absolutely prevented him from
getting his ship into her proper course, and he could not altogether
suppress his misgiving that the calms near the Tropic of Capricorn, and
the equatorial current driving him on westwards, would entail a delay
that might be serious.

[Illustration: Dick and little Jack.]

It was principally on Mrs. Weldon's account that the Captain began to
feel uneasiness, and he made up his mind that if he could hail a vessel
proceeding to America he should advise his passengers to embark on her;
unfortunately, however, he felt that they were still in a latitude far
too much to the south to make it likely that they should sight a
steamer going to Panama; and at that date, communication between
Australia and the New World was much less frequent than it has since
become.

Still, nothing occurred to interrupt the general monotony of the voyage
until the 2nd of February, the date at which our narrative commences.

It was about nine o'clock in the morning of that day that Dick and
little Jack had perched themselves together on the top-mast-yards. The
weather was very clear, and they could see the horizon right round
except the section behind them, hidden by the brigantine-sail on the
main-mast. Below them, the bowsprit seemed to lie along the water with
its stay-sails attached like three unequal wings; from the lads' feet
to the deck was the smooth surface of the fore-mast; and above their
heads nothing but the small top-sail and the top-mast. The schooner was
running on the larboard tack as close to the wind as possible.

Dick Sand was pointing out to Jack how well the ship was ballasted, and
was trying to explain how it was impossible for her to capsize, however
much she heeled to starboard, when suddenly the little fellow cried
out,--

"I can see something in the water!"

"Where? what?" exclaimed Dick, clambering to his feet upon the yard.

"There!" said the child, directing attention to the portion of the
sea-surface that was visible between the stay-sails.

Dick fixed his gaze intently for a moment, and then shouted out
lustily,--

"Look out in front, to starboard! There is something afloat. To
windward, look out!"




CHAPTER III.

A RESCUE.


At the sound of Dick's voice all the crew, in a moment, were upon the
alert. The men who were not on watch rushed to the deck, and Captain
Hull hurried from his cabin to the bows. Mrs. Weldon, Nan, and even
Cousin Benedict leaned over the starboard taffrails, eager to get a
glimpse of what had thus suddenly attracted the attention of the young
apprentice. With his usual indifference, Negoro did not leave his
cabin, and was the only person on board who did not share the general
excitement.

Speculations were soon rife as to what could be the nature of the
floating object which could be discerned about three miles ahead.
Suggestions of various character were freely made. One of the sailors
declared that it looked to him only like an abandoned raft, but Mrs.
Weldon observed quickly that if it were a raft it might be carrying
some unfortunate shipwrecked men who must be rescued if possible.
Cousin Benedict asserted that it was nothing more nor less than a huge
sea-monster; but the captain soon arrived at the conviction that it was
the hull of a vessel that had heeled over on to its side, an opinion
with which Dick thoroughly coincided, and went so far as to say that he
believed he could make out the copper keel glittering in the sun.

"Luff, Bolton, luff!" shouted Captain Hull to the helmsman; "we will at
any rate lose no time in getting alongside."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered the helmsman, and the "Pilgrim" in an instant
was steered according to orders.

In spite, however, of the convictions of the captain and Dick, Cousin
Benedict would not be moved from his opinion that the object of their
curiosity was some huge cetacean.

"It is certainly dead, then," remarked Mrs. Weldon; "it is perfectly
motionless."

"Oh, that's because it is asleep," said Benedict, who, although he
would have willingly given up all the whales in the ocean for one rare
specimen of an insect, yet could not surrender his own belief.

"Easy, Bolton, easy!" shouted the captain when they were getting nearer
the floating mass; "don't let us be running foul of the thing; no good
could come from knocking a hole in our side; keep out from it a good
cable's length."

"Ay, ay, sir," replied the helmsman, in his usual cheery way; and by an
easy turn of the helm the "Pilgrim's" course was slightly modified so
as to avoid all fear of collision.

The excitement of the sailors by this time had become more intense.
Ever since the distance had been less than a mile all doubt had
vanished, and it was certain that what was attracting their attention
was the hull of a capsized ship. They knew well enough the established
rule that a third of all salvage is the right of the finders, and they
were filled with the hope that the hull they were nearing might contain
an undamaged cargo, and be "a good haul," to compensate them for their
ill-success in the last season.

A quarter of an hour later and the "Pilgrim" was within half a mile of
the deserted vessel, facing her starboard side. Water-logged to her
bulwarks, she had heeled over so completely that it would have been
next to impossible to stand upon her deck. Of her masts nothing was to
be seen; a few ends of cordage were all that remained of her shrouds,
and the try-sail chains were hanging all broken. On the starboard flank
was an enormous hole.

"Something or other has run foul of her," said Dick.

"No doubt of that," replied the captain; "the only wonder is that she
did not sink immediately."

"Oh, how I hope the poor crew have been saved!" exclaimed Mrs Weldon.

"Most probably," replied the captain, "they would all have taken to the
boats. It is as likely as not that the ship which did the mischief
would continue its course quite unconcerned."

"Surely, you cannot mean," cried Mrs Weldon, "that any one could be
capable of such inhumanity?"

"Only too probable," answered Captain Hull, "unfortunately, such
instances are very far from rare."

He scanned the drifting ship carefully and continued,--

"No, I cannot see any sign of boats here, I should guess that the crew
have made an attempt to get to land, at such a distance as this,
however, from America or from the islands of the Pacific I should be
afraid that it must be hopeless."

"Is it not possible," asked Mrs Weldon, "that some poor creature may
still survive on board, who can tell what has happened?"

"Hardly likely, madam; otherwise there would have been some sort of a
signal in sight. But it is a matter about which we will make sure."

The captain waved his hand a little in the direction in which he wished
to go, and said quietly,--

"Luff, Bolton, luff a bit!"

The "Pilgrim" by this time was not much more than three cables' lengths
from the ship, there was still no token of her being otherwise than
utterly deserted, when Dick Sands suddenly exclaimed,--

"Hark! if I am not much mistaken, that is a dog barking!"

Every one listened attentively; it was no fancy on Dick's part, sure
enough a stifled barking could be heard, as if some unfortunate dog had
been imprisoned beneath the hatchways; but as the deck was not yet
visible, it was impossible at present to determine the precise truth.

Mrs Weldon pleaded,--

"If it is only a dog, captain, let it be saved."

"Oh, yes, yes, mamma, the dog must be saved!" cried little Jack; "I
will go and get a bit of sugar ready for it."

[Illustration: Negoro had approached without being noticed by any one]

"A bit of sugar, my child, will not be much for a starved dog."

"Then it shall have my soup, and I will do without," said the boy, and
he kept shouting, "Good dog! good dog!" until he persuaded himself that
he heard the animal responding to his call.

The vessels were now scarcely three hundred feet apart; the barking was
more and more distinct, and presently a great dog was seen clinging to
the starboard netting. It barked more desperately than ever.

"Howick," said Captain Hull, calling to the boatswain, "heave to, and
lower the small boat."

The sails were soon trimmed so as to bring the schooner to a standstill
within half a cable's length of the disabled craft, the boat was
lowered, and the captain and Dick, with a couple of sailors, went on
board. The dog kept up a continual yelping; it made the most vigourous
efforts to retain its hold upon the netting, but perpetually slipped
backwards and fell off again upon the inclining deck. It was soon
manifest, however, that all the noise the creature was making was not
directed exclusively towards those who were coming to its rescue, and
Mrs. Weldon could not divest herself of the impression that there must
be some survivors still on board. All at once the animal changed its
gestures. Instead of the crouching attitude and supplicating whine with
which it seemed to be imploring the compassion of those who were
nearing it, it suddenly appeared to become bursting with violence and
furious with rage.

"What ails the brute?" exclaimed Captain Hull.

But already the boat was on the farther side of the wrecked ship, and
the captain was not in a position to see that Negoro the cook had just
come on to the schooner's deck, or that it was obvious that it was
against him that the dog had broken out in such obstreperous fury.
Negoro had approached without being noticed by any one; he made his way
to the forecastle, whence, without a word or look of surprise, he gazed
a moment at the dog, knitted his brow, and, silent and unobserved as he
had come, retired to his kitchen.

As the boat had rounded the stern of the drifting hull, it had been
observed that the one word "Waldeck" was painted on the aft-board, but
that there was no intimation of the port to which the ship belonged. To
Captain Hull's experienced eye, however, certain details of
construction gave a decided confirmation to the probability suggested
by her name that she was of American build.

Of what had once been a fine brig of 500 tons burden this hopeless
wreck was now all that remained. The large hole near the bows indicated
the place where the disastrous shock had occurred, but as, in the
heeling over, this aperture had been carried some five or six feet
above the water, the vessel had escaped the immediate foundering which
must otherwise have ensued; but still it wanted only the rising of a
heavy swell to submerge the ship at any time in a few minutes.

It did not take many more strokes to bring the boat close to the
larboard bulwark, which was half out of the water, and Captain Hull
obtained a view of the whole length of the deck. It was clear from end
to end. Both masts had been snapped off within two feet of their
sockets, and had been swept away with shrouds, stays, and rigging. Not
a single spar was to be seen floating anywhere within sight of the
wreck, a circumstance from which it was to be inferred that several
days at least had elapsed since the catastrophe.

Meantime the dog, sliding down from the taffrail, got to the centre
hatchway, which was open. Here it continued to bark, alternately
directing its eyes above deck and below.

"Look at that dog!" said Dick; "I begin to think there must be somebody
on board."

"If so," answered the captain, "he must have died of hunger; the water
of course has flooded the store-room."

"No," said Dick; "that dog wouldn't look like that if there were nobody
there alive."

[Illustration: The dog began to swim slowly and with manifest weakness
towards the boat.]

Taking the boat as close as was prudent to the wreck, the captain and
Dick called and whistled repeatedly to the dog, which after a while let
itself slip into the sea, and began to swim slowly and with manifest
weakness towards the boat. As soon as it was lifted in, the animal,
instead of devouring the piece of bread that was offered him, made its
way to a bucket containing a few drops of fresh water, and began
eagerly to lap them up.

"The poor wretch is dying of thirst!" said Dick.

It soon appeared that the dog was very far from being engrossed with
its own interests. The boat was being pushed back a few yards in order
to allow the captain to ascertain the most convenient place to get
alongside the "Waldeck," when the creature seized Dick by the jacket,
and set up a howl that was almost human in its piteousness. It was
evidently in a state of alarm that the boat was not going to return to
the wreck. The dog's meaning could not be misunderstood. The boat was
accordingly brought against the larboard side of the vessel, and while
the two sailors lashed her securely to the "Waldeck's" cat-head,
Captain Hull and Dick, with the dog persistently accompanying them,
clambered, after some difficulty, to the open hatchway between the
stumps of the masts, and made their way into the hold. It was half full
of water, but perfectly destitute of cargo, its sole contents being the
ballast sand which had slipped to larboard, and now served to keep the
vessel on her side.

One glance was sufficient to convince the captain that there was no
salvage to be effected.

"There is nothing here; nobody here," he said.

"So I see," said the apprentice, who had made his way to the extreme
fore-part of the hold.

"Then we have only to go up again," remarked the captain.

They ascended the ladder, but no sooner did they reappear upon the deck
than the dog, barking irrepressibly, began trying manifestly to drag
them towards the stern.

Yielding to what might be called the importunities of the dog, they
followed him to the poop, and there, by the dim glimmer admitted by the
sky-light, Captain Hull made out the forms of five bodies, motionless
and apparently lifeless, stretched upon the floor.

One after another, Dick hastily examined them all, and emphatically
declared it to be his opinion, that not one or them had actually ceased
to breathe; whereupon the captain did not lose a minute in summoning
the two sailors to his aid, and although it was far from an easy task,
he succeeded in getting the five unconscious men, who were all negroes,
conveyed safely to the boat.

The dog followed, apparently satisfied.

With all possible speed the boat made its way back again to the
"Pilgrim," a girt-line was lowered from the mainyard, and the
unfortunate men were raised to the deck.

"Poor things!" said Mrs. Weldon, as she looked compassionately on the
motionless forms.

"But they are not dead," cried Dick eagerly; "they are not dead; we
shall save them all yet!"

"What's the matter with them?" asked Cousin Benedict, looking at them
with utter bewilderment.

"We shall hear all about them soon, I dare say," said the captain,
smiling; "but first we will give them a few drops of rum in some water."

Cousin Benedict smiled in return.

"Negoro!" shouted the captain.

At the sound of the name, the dog, who had hitherto been quite passive,
growled fiercely, showed his teeth, and exhibited every sign of rage.

The cook did not answer.

"Negoro!" again the captain shouted, and the dog became yet more angry.

At this second summons Negoro slowly left his kitchen, but no sooner
had he shown his face upon the deck than the animal made a rush at him,
and would unquestionably have seized him by the throat if the man had
not knocked him back with a poker which he had brought with him in his
hand.

The infuriated beast was secured by the sailors, and prevented from
inflicting any serious injury.

"Do you know this dog?" asked the captain.

"Know him? Not I! I have never set eyes on the brute in my life."

"Strange!" muttered Dick to himself; "there is some mystery here. We
shall see."




CHAPTER IV.

THE SURVIVORS OF THE "WALDECK."


In spite of the watchfulness of the French and English cruisers, there
is no doubt that the slave-trade is still extensively carried on in all
parts of equatorial Africa, and that year after year vessels loaded
with slaves leave the coasts of Angola and Mozambique to transport
their living freight to many quarters even of the civilized world.

Of this Captain Hull was well aware, and although he was now in a
latitude which was comparatively little traversed by such slavers, he
could not help almost involuntarily conjecturing that the negroes they
had just found must be part of a slave-cargo which was on its way to
some colony of the Pacific; if this were so, he would at least have the
satisfaction of announcing to them that they had regained their freedom
from the moment that they came on board the "Pilgrim."

Whilst these thoughts were passing through his mind, Mrs. Weldon,
assisted by Nan and the ever active Dick Sands, was doing everything in
her power to restore consciousness to the poor sufferers. The judicious
administration of fresh water and a limited quantity of food soon had
the effect of making them revive; and when they were restored to their
senses it was found that the eldest of them, a man of about sixty years
of age, who immediately regained his powers of speech, was able to
reply in good English to all the questions that were put to him. In
answer to Captain Hull's inquiry whether they were not slaves, the old
negro proudly stated that he and his companions were all free American
citizens, belonging to the state of Pennsylvania.

[Illustration: Mrs. Weldon, assisted by Nan and the ever active Dick
Sands, was doing everything in her power to restore consciousness to
the poor sufferers.]

"Then, let me assure you, my friend," said the captain, "you have by no
means compromised your liberty in having been brought on board the
American schooner 'Pilgrim.'"

Not merely, as it seemed, on account of his age and experience, but
rather because of a certain superiority and greater energy of
character, this old man was tacitly recognized as the spokesman of his
party; he freely communicated all the information that Captain Hull
required to hear, and by degrees he related all the details of his
adventures.

He said that his name was Tom, and that when he was only six years of
age he had been sold as a slave, and brought from his home in Africa to
the United States; but by the act of emancipation he had long since
recovered his freedom. His companions, who were all much younger than
himself, their ages ranging from twenty-five to thirty, were all
free-born, their parents having been emancipated before their birth, so
that no white man had ever exercised upon them the rights of ownership.
One of them was his own son; his name was Bat (an abbreviation of
Bartholomew); and there were three others, named Austin, Actæon, and
Hercules. All four of them were specimens of that stalwart race that
commands so high a price in the African market, and in spite of the
emaciation induced by their recent sufferings, their muscular,
well-knit frames betokened a strong and healthy constitution. Their
manner bore the impress of that solid education which is given in the
North American schools, and their speech had lost all trace of the
"nigger-tongue," a dialect without articles or inflexions, which since
the anti-slavery war has almost died out in the United States.

Three years ago, old Tom stated, the five men had been engaged by an
Englishman who had large property in South Australia, to work upon his
estates near Melbourne. Here they had realized a considerable profit,
and upon the completion of their engagement they determined to return
with their savings to America. Accordingly, on the 5th of January,
after paying their passage in the ordinary way, they embarked at
Melbourne on board the "Waldeck." Everything went on well for seventeen
days, until, on the night of the 22nd, which was very dark, they were
run into by a great steamer. They were all asleep in their berths, but,
roused by the shock of the collision, which was extremely severe, they
hurriedly made their way on to the deck. The scene was terrible; both
masts were gone, and the brig, although the water had not absolutely
flooded her hold so as to make her sink, had completely heeled over on
her side. Captain and crew had entirely disappeared, some probably
having been dashed into the sea, others perhaps having saved themselves
by clinging to the rigging of the ship which had fouled them, and which
could be distinguished through the darkness rapidly receding in the
distance. For a while they were paralyzed, but they soon awoke to the
conviction that they were left alone upon a half-capsized and disabled
hull, twelve hundred miles from the nearest land. Mrs. Weldon was loud
in her expression of indignation that any captain should have the
barbarity to abandon an unfortunate vessel with which his own
carelessness had brought him into collision. It would be bad enough,
she said for a driver on a public road, when it might be presumed that
help would be forthcoming, to pass on unconcerned after causing an
accident to another vehicle; but how much more shameful to desert the
injured on the open sea, where the victims of his incompetence could
have no chance of obtaining succour! Captain Hull could only repeat
what he had said before, that incredibly atrocious as it might seem,
such inhumanity was far from rare.

On resuming his story, Tom said that he and his companions soon found
that they had no means left for getting away from the capsized brig;
both the boats had been crushed in the collision, so that they had no
alternative except to await the appearance of a passing vessel, whilst
the wreck was drifting hopelessly along under the action of the
currents. This accounted for the fact of their being found so far south
of their proper course.

For the next ten days the negroes had subsisted upon a few scraps of
food that they found in the stern cabin; but as the store room was
entirely under water, they were quite unable to obtain a drop of
anything to drink, and the freshwater tanks that had been lashed to the
deck had been stove in at the time of the catastrophe. Tortured with
thirst, the poor men had suffered agonies, and having on the previous
night entirely lost consciousness, they must soon have died if the
"Pilgrim's" timely arrival had not effected their rescue.

All the outlines of Tom's narrative were fully confirmed by the other
negroes; Captain Hull could see no reason to doubt it; indeed, the
facts seemed to speak for themselves.

One other survivor of the wreck, if he had been gifted with the power
of speech, would doubtless have corroborated the testimony. This was
the dog who seemed to have such an unaccountable dislike to Negoro.

Dingo, as the dog was named, belonged to the fine breed of mastiffs
peculiar to New Holland. It was not, however, from Australia, but from
the coast of West Africa, near the mouth of the Congo, that the animal
had come. He had been picked up there, two years previously, by the
captain of the "Waldeck," who had found him wandering about and more
than half starved. The initials S. V. engraved upon his collar were the
only tokens that the dog had a past history of his own. After he had
been taken on board the "Waldeck," he remained quite unsociable,
apparently ever pining for some lost master, whom he had failed to find
in the desert land where he had been met with.

Larger than the dogs of the Pyrenees, Dingo was a magnificent example
of his kind. Standing on his hind legs, with his head thrown back, he
was as tall as a man. His agility and strength would have made him a
sure match for a panther, and he would not have flinched at facing a
bear. His fine shaggy coat was a dark tawny colour, shading off
somewhat lighter round the muzzle, and his long bushy tail was as
strong as a lion's. If he were made angry, no doubt he might become a
most formidable foe, so that it was no wonder that Negoro did not feel
altogether gratified at his reception.

But Dingo, though unsociable, was not savage. Old Tom said that, on
board the "Waldeck," he had noticed that the animal seemed to have a
particular dislike to negroes; not that he actually attempted to do
them any harm, only he uniformly avoided them, giving an impression
that he must have been systematically ill-treated by the natives of
that part of Africa in which he had been found. During the ten days
that had elapsed since the collision, Dingo had kept resolutely aloof
from Tom and his companions; they could not tell what he had been
feeding on; they only knew that, like themselves, he had suffered an
excruciating thirst.

Such had been the experience of the survivors of the "Waldeck." Their
situation had been most critical. Even if they survived the pangs of
want of food, the slightest gale or the most inconsiderable swell might
at any moment have sunk the water-logged ship, and had it not been that
calms and contrary winds had contributed to the opportune arrival of
the "Pilgrim," an inevitable fate was before them; their corpses must
lie at the bottom of the sea.

Captain Hull's act of humanity, however, would not be complete unless
he succeeded in restoring the shipwrecked men to their homes. This he
promised to do. After completing the unlading at Valparaiso, the
"Pilgrim" would make direct for California, where, as Mrs. Weldon
assured them, they would be most hospitably received by her husband,
and provided with the necessary means for returning to Pennsylvania.

The five men, who, as the consequence of the shipwreck, had lost all
the savings of their last three years of toil, were profoundly grateful
to their kind-hearted benefactors; nor, poor negroes as they were, did
they utterly resign the hope that at some future time they might have
it in their power to repay the debt which they owed their deliverers.

[Illustration: The good natured negroes were ever ready to lend a
helping hand.]




CHAPTER V.

DINGO'S SAGACITY.


Meantime the "Pilgrim" pursued her course, keeping as much as possible
to the east, and before evening closed in the hull of the "Waldeck" was
out of sight.

Captain Hull still continued to feel uneasy about the constant
prevalence of calms; not that for himself he cared much about the delay
of a week or two in a voyage from New Zealand to Valparaiso, but he was
disappointed at the prolonged inconvenience it caused to his lady
passenger. Mrs. Weldon, however, submitted to the detention very
philosophically, and did not utter a word of complaint.

The captain's next care was to improvise sleeping accommodation for Tom
and his four associates. No room for them could possibly be found in
the crew's quarters, so that their berths had to be arranged under the
forecastle; and as long as the weather continued fine, there was no
reason why the negroes, accustomed as they were to a somewhat rough
life, should not find themselves sufficiently comfortable.

After this incident of the discovery of the wreck, life on board the
"Pilgrim" relapsed into its ordinary routine. With the wind invariably
in the same direction, the sails required very little shifting; but
whenever it happened, as occasionally it would, that there was any
tacking to be done, the good-natured negroes were ever ready to lend a
helping hand; and the rigging would creak again under the weight of
Hercules, a great strapping fellow, six feet high, who seemed almost to
require ropes of extra strength made for his special use.

Hercules became at once a great favourite with little Jack; and when
the giant lifted him like a doll in his stalwart arms, the child fairly
shrieked with delight.

"Higher! higher! very high!" Jack would say sometimes.

"There you are, then, Master Jack," Hercules would reply as he raised
him aloft.

"Am I heavy?" asked the child,

"As heavy as a feather."

"Then lift me higher still," cried Jack; "as high as ever you can
reach."

And Hercules, with the child's two feet supported on his huge palm,
would walk about the deck with him like an acrobat, Jack all the time
endeavouring, with vain efforts, to make him "feel his weight."

Besides Dick Sands and Hercules, Jack admitted a third friend to his
companionship. This was Dingo. The dog, unsociable as he had been on
board the "Waldeck," seemed to have found society more congenial to his
tastes, and being one of those animals that are fond of children, he
allowed Jack to do with him almost anything he pleased. The child,
however, never thought of hurting the dog in any way, and it was
doubtful which of the two had the greater enjoyment of their mutual
sport. Jack found a live dog infinitely more entertaining than his old
toy upon its four wheels, and his great delight was to mount upon
Dingo's back, when the animal would gallop off with him like a
race-horse with his jockey. It must be owned that one result of this
intimacy was a serious diminution of the supply of sugar in the
store-room. Dingo was the delight of all the crew excepting Negoro, who
cautiously avoided coming in contact with an animal who showed such
unmistakable symptoms of hostility.

The new companions that Jack had thus found did not in the least make
him forget his old friend Dick Sands, who devoted all his leisure time
to him as assiduously as ever. Mrs. Weldon regarded their intimacy with
the greatest satisfaction, and one day made a remark to that effect in
the presence of Captain Hull.

[Illustration: "There you are, then, Master Jack!"]

"You are right, madam," said the captain cordially; "Dick is a capital
fellow, and will be sure to be a first-rate sailor. He has an instinct
which is little short of a genius; it supplies all deficiencies of
theory. Considering how short an experience and how little instruction
he has had, it is quite wonderful how much he knows about a ship."

"Certainly for his age," assented Mrs. Weldon, "he is singularly
advanced. I can safely say that I have never had a fault to find with
him. I believe that it is my husband's intention, after this voyage, to
let him have systematic training in navigation, so that he may be able
ultimately to become a captain."

"I have no misgivings, madam," replied the captain; "there is every
reason to expect that he will be an honour to the service."

"Poor orphan!" said the lady; "he has been trained in a hard school."

"Its lessons have not been lost upon him," rejoined Captain Hull; "they
have taught him the prime lesson that he has his own way to make in the
world."

The eyes of the two speakers turned as it were unwittingly in the
direction where Dick Sands happened to be standing. He was at the helm.

"Look at him now!" said the captain; "see how steadily he keeps his eye
upon the fore; nothing distracts him from his duty; he is as much to be
depended on as the most experienced helmsman. It was a capital thing
for him that he began his training as a cabin-boy. Nothing like it.
Begin at the beginning. It is the best of training for the merchant
service."

"But surely," interposed Mrs. Weldon, "you would not deny that in the
navy there have been many good officers who have never had the training
of which you are speaking?"

"True, madam; but yet even some of the best of them have begun at the
lowest step of the ladder. For instance, Lord Nelson."

Just at this instant Cousin Benedict emerged from the stern-cabin, and
completely absorbed, according to his wont, in his own pursuit, began
to wander up and down the deck, peering into the interstices of the
network, rummaging under the seats, and drawing his long fingers along
the cracks in the floor where the tar had crumbled away.

"Well, Benedict, how are you getting on?" asked Mrs Weldon.

"I? Oh, well enough, thank you," he replied dreamily; "but I wish we
were on shore."

"What were you looking for under that bench?" said Captain Hull.

"Insects, of course," answered Benedict; "I am always looking for
insects."

"But don't you know, Benedict," said Mrs. Weldon, "that Captain Hull is
far too particular to allow any vermin on the deck of his vessel?"

Captain Hull smiled and said,--

"Mrs Weldon is very complimentary; but I am really inclined to hope
that your investigations in the cabins of the 'Pilgrim' will not be
attended with much success."

Cousin Benedict shrugged his shoulders in a manner that indicated that
he was aware that the cabins could furnish nothing attractive in the
way of insects.

"However," continued the captain, "I dare say down in the hold you
could find some cockroaches; but cockroaches, I presume, would be of
little or no interest to you."

"No interest?" cried Benedict, at once warmed into enthusiasm; "why,
are they not the very orthoptera that roused the imprecations of Virgil
and Horace? Are they not closely allied to the _Periplaneta orientalis_
and the American Kakerlac, which inhabit--"

"I should rather say infest," interrupted the captain.

"Easy enough to see, sir," replied Benedict, stopping short with
amazement, "that you are not an entomologist!"

"I fear I must plead guilty to your accusation," said the captain
good-humouredly.

"You must not expect every one to be such an enthusiast in your
favourite study as yourself." Mrs. Weldon interposed; "but are you not
satisfied with the result of your explorations in New Zealand?"

"Yes, yes," answered Benedict, with a sort of hesitating reluctance; "I
must not say I was dissatisfied; I was really very delighted to secure
that new staphylin which hitherto had never been seen elsewhere than in
New California; but still, you know, an entomologist is always craving
for fresh additions to his collection."

While he was speaking, Dingo, leaving little Jack, who was romping with
him, came and jumped on Benedict, and began to fawn on him.

"Get away, you brute!" he exclaimed, thrusting the dog aside.

"Poor Dingo! good dog!" cried Jack, running up and taking the animal's
huge head between his tiny hands.

"Your interest in cockroaches, Mr. Benedict," observed the captain,
"does not seem to extend to dogs."

"It isn't that I dislike dogs at all," answered Benedict; "but this
creature has disappointed me."

"How do you mean? You could hardly want to catalogue him with the
diptera or hymenoptera?" asked Mrs Weldon laughingly.

"Oh, not at all," replied Benedict, with the most unmoved gravity. "But
I understood that he had been found on the West Coast of Africa, and I
hoped that perhaps he might have brought over some African hemiptera in
his coat; but I have searched his coat well, over and over again,
without finding a single specimen. The dog has disappointed me," he
repeated mournfully.

"I can only hope," said the captain, "that if you had found anything,
you were going to kill it instantly."

Benedict looked with mute astonishment into the captain's face. In a
moment or two afterwards, he said,--

"I suppose, sir, you acknowledge that Sir John Franklin was an eminent
member of your profession?"

"Certainly; why?"

"Because Sir John would never take away the life of the most
insignificant insect; it is related of him that when he had once been
incessantly tormented all day by a mosquito, at last he found it on the
back of his hand and blew it off, saying, 'Fly away, little creature,
the world is large enough for both you and me!'"

"That little anecdote of yours, Mr. Benedict," said the captain,
smiling, "is a good deal older than Sir John Franklin. It is told, in
nearly the same words, about Uncle Toby, in Sterne's 'Tristram Shandy';
only there it was not a mosquito, it was a common fly."

"And was Uncle Toby an entomologist?" asked Benedict; "did he ever
really live?"

"No," said the captain, "he was only a character in a novel."

Cousin Benedict gave a look of utter contempt, and Captain Hull and Mrs
Weldon could not resist laughing.

Such is only one instance of the way in which Cousin Benedict
invariably brought it about that all conversation with him ultimately
turned upon his favourite pursuit, and all along, throughout the
monotonous hours of smooth sailing, while the "Pilgrim" was making her
little headway to the east, he showed his own devotion to his pet
science, by seeking to enlist new disciples. First of all, he tried his
powers of persuasion upon Dick Sands, but soon finding that the young
apprentice had no taste for entomological mysteries, he gave him up and
turned his attention to the negroes. Nor was he much more successful
with them; one after another, Tom, Bat, Actæon, and Austin had all
withdrawn themselves from his instructions, and the class at last was
reduced to the single person of Hercules; but in him the enthusiastic
naturalist thought he had discovered a latent talent which could
distinguish between a parasite and a thysanura.

Hercules accordingly submitted to pass a considerable portion of his
leisure in the observation of every variety of coleoptera; he was
encouraged to study the extensive collection of stag-beetles,
tiger-beetles and lady-birds; and although at times the enthusiast
trembled to see some of his most delicate and fragile specimens in the
huge grasp of his pupil, he soon learned that the man's gentle docility
was a sufficient guarantee against his clumsiness.

While the science of entomology was thus occupying its two votaries,
Mrs. Weldon was giving her own best attention to the education of
Master Jack. Reading and writing she undertook to teach herself, while
she entrusted the instruction in arithmetic to the care of Dick Sands.
Under the conviction that a child of five years will make a much more
rapid progress if something like amusement be combined with his
lessons, Mrs. Weldon would not teach her boy to spell by the use of an
ordinary school primer, but used a set of cubes, on the sides of which
the various letters were painted in red. After first making a word and
showing it to Jack, she set him to put it together without her help,
and it was astonishing how quickly the child advanced, and how many
hours he would spend in this way, both in the cabin and on deck. There
were more than fifty cubes, which, besides the alphabet, included all
the digits; so that they were of service for Dick Sands' lessons as
well as for her own. She was more than satisfied with her device.

On the morning of the 9th an incident occurred which could not fail to
be observed as somewhat remarkable. Jack was half lying, half sitting
on the deck, amusing himself with his letters, and had just finished
putting together a word with which he intended to puzzle old Tom, who,
with his hand sheltering his eyes, was pretending not to see the
difficulty which was being labouriously prepared to bewilder him; all
at once, Dingo, who had been gambolling round the child, made a sudden
pause, lifted his right paw, and wagged his tail convulsively. Then
darting down upon a capital S, he seized it in his mouth, and carried
it some paces away.

"Oh, Dingo, Dingo! you mustn't eat my letters!" shouted the child.

But the dog had already dropped the block of wood, and coming back
again, picked up another, which he laid quietly by the side of the
first. This time it was a capital V. Jack uttered an exclamation of
astonishment which brought to his side not only his mother, but the
captain and Dick, who were both on deck. In answer to their inquiry as
to what had occurred, Jack cried out in the greatest excitement that
Dingo knew how to read. At any rate he was sure that he knew his
letters.

Dick Sands smiled and stooped to take back the letters. Dingo snarled
and showed his teeth, but the apprentice was not frightened; he carried
his point, and replaced the two blocks among the rest. Dingo in an
instant pounced upon them again, and having drawn them to his side,
laid a paw upon each of them, as if to signify his intention of
retaining them in his possession. Of the other letters of the alphabet
he took no notice at all.

"It is very strange," said Mrs. Weldon; "he has picked out S V again."

"S V!" repeated the captain thoughtfully; "are not those the letters
that form the initials on his collar?"

And turning to the old negro, he continued,--

"Tom didn't you say that this dog did not always belong to the captain
of the 'Waldeck'?"

"To the best of my belief," replied Tom, "the captain had only had him
about two years. I often heard him tell how he found him at the mouth
of the Congo."

"Do you suppose that he never knew where the animal came from, or to
whom he had previously belonged?" asked Captain Hull.

"Never," answered Tom, shaking his head; "a lost dog is worse to
identify than a lost child; you see, he can't make himself understood
any way."

The captain made no answer, but stood musing; Mrs. Weldon interrupted
him.

"These letters, captain, seem to be recalling something to your
recollection.

"I can hardly go so far as to say that, Mrs. Weldon," he replied; "but
I cannot help associating them with the fate of a brave explorer."

"Whom do you mean? said the lady.

"In 1871, just two years ago," the captain continued, "a French
traveller, under the auspices of the Geographical Society of Paris, set
out for the purpose of crossing Africa from west to east. His
starting-point was the mouth of the Congo, and his exit was designed to
be as near as possible to Cape Deldago, at the mouth of the River
Rovouma, of which he was to ascertain the true course. The name of this
man was Samuel Vernon, and I confess it strikes me as somewhat a
strange coincidence that the letters engraved on Dingo's collar should
be Vernon's initials."

[Illustration: Jack cried out in the greatest excitement that Dingo
knew how to read]

"Is nothing known about this traveller?" asked Mrs. Weldon.

"Nothing was ever heard of him after his first departure. It appears
quite certain that he failed to reach the east coast, and it can only
be conjectured either that he died upon his way, or that he was made
prisoner by the natives; and if so, and this dog ever belonged to him,
the animal might have made his way back to the sea-coast, where, just
about the time that would be likely, the captain of the 'Waldeck'
picked him up."

"But you have no reason to suppose, Captain Hull, that Vernon ever
owned a dog of this description?"

"I own I never heard of it," said the captain; "but still the
impression fixes itself on my mind that the dog must have been his; how
he came to know one letter from another, it is not for me to pretend to
say. Look at him now, madam! he seems not only to be reading the
letters for himself, but to be inviting us to come and read them with
him."

Whilst Mrs. Weldon was watching the dog with much amusement, Dick
Sands, who had listened to the previous conversation, took the
opportunity of asking the captain whether the traveller Vernon had
started on his expedition quite alone.

"That is really more than I can tell you, my boy," answered Captain
Hull; "but I should almost take it for granted that he would have a
considerable retinue of natives."

The captain spoke without being aware that Negoro had meanwhile quietly
stolen on deck. At first his presence was quite unnoticed, and no one
observed the peculiar glance with which he looked at the two letters
over which Dingo still persisted in keeping guard. The dog, however, no
sooner caught sight of the cook than he began to bristle with rage,
whereupon Negoro, with a threatening gesture which seemed half
involuntary, withdrew immediately to his accustomed quarters.

The incident did not escape the captain's observation.

"No doubt," he said, "there is some mystery here;" and he was pondering
the matter over in his mind when Dick Sands spoke.

"Don't you think it very singular, sir, that this dog should have such
a knowledge of the alphabet?"

Jack here put in his word.

"My mamma has told me about a dog whose name was Munito, who could read
as well as a schoolmaster, and could play dominoes."

Mrs. Weldon smiled.

"I am afraid, my child, that that dog was not quite so learned as you
imagine. I don't suppose he knew one letter from another; but his
master, who was a clever American, having found out that the animal had
a very keen sense of hearing, taught him some curious tricks."

"What sort of tricks?" asked Dick, who was almost as much interested as
little Jack.

"When he had to perform in public," continued Mrs. Weldon, "a lot of
letters like yours, Jack, were spread out upon a table, and Munito
would put together any word that the company should propose, either
aloud or in a whisper, to his master. The creature would walk about
until he stopped at the very letter which was wanted. The secret of it
all was that the dog's owner gave him a signal when he was to stop by
rattling a little tooth-pick in his pocket, making a slight noise that
only the dog's ears were acute enough to perceive."

Dick was highly amused, and said,--

"But that was a dog who could do nothing wonderful without his master."

"Just so," answered Mrs. Weldon; "and it surprises me very much to see
Dingo picking out these letters without a master to direct him."

[Illustration: Negoro, with a threatening gesture that seemed half
involuntary, withdrew immediately to his accustomed quarters.]

"The more one thinks of it, the more strange it is," said Captain Hull;
"but, after all, Dingo's sagacity is not greater than that of the dog
which rang the convent bell in order to get at the dish that was
reserved for passing beggars; nor than that of the dog who had to turn
a spit every other day, and never could be induced to work when it was
not his proper day. Dingo evidently has no acquaintance with any other
letters except the two S V; and some circumstance which we can never
guess has made him familiar with them."

"What a pity he cannot talk!" exclaimed the apprentice; "we should know
why it is that he always shows his teeth at Negoro."

"And tremendous teeth they are!" observed the captain, as Dingo at that
moment opened his mouth, and made a display of his formidable fangs.




CHAPTER VI.

A WHALE IN SIGHT.


It was only what might be expected that the dog's singular exhibition
of sagacity should repeatedly form a subject of conversation between
Mrs. Weldon, the captain, and Dick. The young apprentice in particular
began to entertain a lurking feeling of distrust towards Negoro,
although it must be owned that the man's conduct in general afforded no
tangible grounds for suspicion.

Nor as it only among the stern passengers that Dingo's remarkable feat
was discussed; amongst the crew in the bow the dog not only soon gained
the reputation of being able to read, but was almost credited with
being able to write too, as well as any sailor among them; indeed the
chief wonder was that he did not speak.

"Perhaps he can," suggested Bolton, the helmsman, "and likely enough
some fine day we shall have him coming to ask about our bearings, and
to inquire which way the wind lies."

"Ah! why not?" assented another sailor; "parrots talk, and magpies
talk; why shouldn't a dog? For my part, I should guess it must be
easier to speak with a mouth than with a beak."

"Of course it is," said Howick, the boatswain; "only a quadruped has
never yet been known to do it."

Perhaps, however, the worthy fellow would have been amazed to hear that
a certain Danish _savant_ once possesed a dog that could actually
pronounce quite distinctly nearly twenty different words, demonstrating
that the construction of the glottis, the aperture at the top of the
windpipe, was adapted for the emission of regular sounds: of course the
animal attached no meaning to the words it uttered any more than a
parrot or a jay can comprehend their own chatterings.

[Illustration: "This Dingo is nothing out of the way."]

Thus, unconsciously, Dingo had become the hero of the hour. On several
separate occasions Captain Hull repeated the experiment of spreading
out the blocks before him, but invariably with the same result; the dog
never failed, without the slightest hesitation, to pick out the two
letters, leaving all the rest of the alphabet quite unnoticed.

Cousin Benedict alone, somewhat ostentatiously, professed to take no
interest in the circumstance.

"You cannot suppose," he said to Captain Hull, after various
repetitions of the trick, "that dogs are to be reckoned the only
animals endowed with intelligence Rats, you know, will always leave a
sinking ship, and beavers invariably raise their dams before the
approach of a flood. Did not the horses of Nicomedes, Scanderberg and
Oppian die of grief for the loss of their masters? Have there not been
instances of donkeys with wonderful memories? Birds, too, have been
trained to do the most remarkable things; they have been taught to
write word after word at their master's dictation; there are cockatoos
who can count the people in a room as accurately as a mathematician;
and haven't you heard of the old Cardinal's parrot that he would not
part with for a hundred gold crowns because it could repeat the
Apostles' creed from beginning to end without a blunder? And insects,"
he continued, warming into enthusiasm, "how marvellously they vindicate
the axiom--

  'In minimis maximus Deus!'

Are not the structures of ants the very models for the architects of a
city? Has the diving-bell of the aquatic argyroneta ever been surpassed
by the invention of the most skilful student of mechanical art? And
cannot fleas go through a drill and fire a gun as well as the most
accomplished artilleryman? This Dingo is nothing out of the way. I
suppose he belongs to some unclassed species of mastiff. Perhaps one
day or other he may come to be identified as the 'canis alphabeticus'
of New Zealand."

The worthy entomologist delivered this and various similar harangues;
but Dingo, nevertheless, retained his high place in the general
estimation, and by the occupants of the forecastle was regarded as
little short of a phenomenon. The feeling, otherwise universal, was not
in any degree shared by Negoro, and it is not improbable that the man
would have been tempted to some foul play with the dog if the open
sympathies of the crew had not kept him in check. More than ever he
studiously avoided coming in contact in any way with the animal, and
Dick Sands in his own mind was quite convinced that since the incident
of the letters, the cook's hatred of the dog had become still more
intense.

After continual alternations with long and wearisome calms the
north-east wind perceptibly moderated, and on the both, Captain Hull
really began to hope that such a change would ensue as to allow the
schooner to run straight before the wind. Nineteen days had elapsed
since the "Pilgrim" had left Auckland, a period not so long but that
with a favourable breeze it might be made up at last. Some days however
were yet to elapse before the wind veered round to the anticipated
quarter.

It has been already stated that this portion of the Pacific is almost
always deserted. It is out of the line of the American and Australian
steam-packets, and except a whaler had been brought into it by some
such exceptional circumstances as the "Pilgrim," it was quite unusual
to see one in this latitude.

But, however void of traffic was the surface of the sea, to none but an
unintelligent mind could it appear monotonous or barren of interest.
The poetry of the ocean breathes forth in its minute and almost
imperceptible changes. A marine plant, a tuft of seaweed lightly
furrowing the water, a drifting spar with its unknown history, may
afford unlimited scope--for the imagination; every little drop passing,
in its process of evaporation, backwards and forwards from sea to sky,
might perchance reveal its own special secret; and happy are those
minds which are capable of a due appreciation of the mysteries of air
and ocean.

[Illustration: Occasionally Dick Sands would take a pistol, and now and
then a rifle.]

Above the surface as well as below, the restless flood is ever teaming
with animal life; and the passengers on board the "Pilgrim" derived no
little amusement from watching great flocks of birds migrating
northwards to escape the rigour of the polar winter, and ever and again
descending in rapid flight to secure some tiny fish. Occasionally Dick
Sands would take a pistol, and now and then a rifle, and, thanks to Mr.
Weldon's former instructions, would bring down various specimens of the
feathered tribe.

Sometimes white petrels would congregate in considerable numbers near
the schooner; and sometimes petrels of another species, with brown
borders on their wings, would come in sight; now there would be flocks
of damiers skimming the water; and now groups of penguins, whose clumsy
gait appears so ludicrous on shore; but, as Captain Hull pointed out,
when their stumpy wings were employed as fins, they were a match for
the most rapid of fish, so that sailors have often mistaken them for
bonitos.

High over head, huge albatrosses, their outspread wings measuring ten
feet from tip to tip, would soar aloft, thence to swoop down towards
the deep, into which they plunged their beaks in search of food. Such
incidents and scenes as these were infinite in their variety, and it
was accordingly only for minds that were obtuse to the charms of nature
that the voyage could be monotonous.

On the day the wind shifted, Mrs. Weldon was walking up and down on the
"Pilgrim's" stern, when her attention was attracted by what seemed to
her a strange phenomenon. All of a sudden, far as the eye could reach,
the sea had assumed a reddish hue, as if it were tinged with blood.

Both Dick and Jack were standing close behind her, and she cried,--

"Look, Dick, look! the sea is all red. Is it a sea-weed that is making
the water so strange a colour?

"No," answered Dick, "it is not a weed; it is what the sailors call
whales' food; it is formed, I believe, of innumerable myriads of minute
crustacea."

"Crustacea they may be," replied Mrs. Weldon, "but they must be so
small that they are mere insects. Cousin Benedict no doubt will like to
see them."

She called aloud,--

"Benedict! Benedict! come here! we have a sight here to interest you."

The amateur naturalist slowly emerged from his cabin followed by
Captain Hull.

"Ah! yes, I see!" said the captain; "whales' food; just the opportunity
for you, Mr. Benedict; a chance not to be thrown away for studying one
of the most curious of the crustacea."

"Nonsense!" ejaculated Benedict contemptuously; "utter nonsense!"

"Why? what do you mean, Mr. Benedict?" retorted the captain; "surely
you, as an entomologist, must know that I am right in my conviction
that these crustacea belong to one of the six classes of the
articulata."

The disdain of Cousin Benedict was expressed by a repeated sneer.

"Are you not aware, sir, that my researches as an entomologist are
confined entirely to the hexapoda?"

Captain Hull, unable to repress a smile, only answered
good-humouredly,--

"I see, sir, your tastes do not lie in the same direction as those of
the whale."

And turning to Mrs. Weldon, he continued,--

"To whalemen, madam, this is a sight that speaks for itself. It is a
token that we ought to lose no time in getting out our lines and
looking to the state of our harpoons. There is game not far away."

Jack gave vent to his astonishment.

"Do you mean that great creatures like whales feed on such tiny things
as these?"

"Yes, my boy," said the captain; "and I daresay they are as nice to
them as semolina and ground rice are to you.

"When a whale gets into the middle of them he has nothing to do but to
open his jaws, and, in a minute, hundreds of thousands of these minute
creatures are inside the fringe or whalebone around his palate, and he
is sure of a good mouthful."

"So you see, Jack," said Dick, "the whale gets his shrimps without the
trouble of shelling them."

"And when he has just closed his snappers is the very time to give him
a good taste of the harpoon," added Captain Hull.

The words had hardly escaped the captain's lips when a shout from one
of the sailors announced,--

"A whale to larboard!"

"There's the whale!" repeated the captain. All his professional
instincts were aroused in an instant, and he hurried to the bow,
followed in eager curiosity by all the stern passengers.

Even Cousin Benedict loitered up in the rear, constrained, in spite of
himself, to take a share in the general interest.

There was no doubt about the matter. Four miles or so to windward an
unusual commotion in the water betokened to experienced eyes the
presence of a whale; but the distance was too great to permit a
reasonable conjecture to be formed as to which species of those
mammifers the creature belonged.

Three distinct species are familiarly known. First there is the Right
whale, which is ordinarily sought for in the northern fisheries. The
average length of this cetacean is sixty feet, though it has been known
to attain the length of eighty feet. It has no dorsal fin, and beneath
its skin is a thick layer of blubber. One of these monsters alone will
yield as much as a hundred barrels of oil.

Then there is the Hump-back, a typical representative of the species
"balænoptera," a definition which may at first sight appear to possess
an interest for an entomologist, but which really refers to two white
dorsal fins, each half as wide as the body, resembling a pair of wings,
and in their formation similar to those of the flying-fish. It must be
owned, however, that a flying whale would decidedly be a _rara avis_.

Lastly, there is the Jubarte, commonly known as the Finback. It is
provided with a dorsal fin, and in length not unfrequently is a match
for the gigantic Right whale.

While it was impossible to decide to which of the three species the
whale in the distance really belonged, the general impression inclined
to the belief that it was a jubarte.

With longing eyes Captain Hull and his crew gazed at the object of
general attraction. Just as irresistibly as it is said a clockmaker is
drawn on to examine the mechanism of every clock which chance may throw
in his way, so is a whaleman ever anxious to plunge his harpoon into
any whale that he can get within his reach. The larger the game the
more keen the excitement; and no elephant-hunter's eagerness ever
surpasses the zest of the whale-fisher when once started in pursuit of
the prey.

To the crew the sight of the whale was the opening of an unexpected
opportunity, and no wonder they were fired with the burning hope that
even now they might do something to supply the deficiency of their
meagre haul throughout the season.

Far away as the creature still was, the captain's practised eye soon
enabled him to detect various indications that satisfied him as to its
true species. Amongst other things that arrested his attention, he
observed a column of water and vapour ejected from the nostrils. "It
isn't a right whale," he said; "if so, its spout would be smaller and
it would rise higher in the air. And I do not think it is a hump-back.
I cannot hear the hump-back's roar. Dick, tell me, what do you think
about it?"

With a critical eye Dick Sands looked long and steadily at the spout.

"It blows out water, sir," said the apprentice, "water, as well as
vapour. I should think it is a finback. But it must be a rare large
one."

"Seventy feet, at least!" rejoined the captain, flushing with his
enthusiasm.

"What a big fellow!" said Jack, catching the excitement of his elders.

[Illustration: "What a big fellow!"]

"Ah, Jack, my boy," chuckled the captain, "the whale little thinks who
are watching him enjoy his breakfast!"

"Yes," said the boatswain; "a dozen such gentlemen as that would
freight a craft twice the size of ours; but this one, if only we can
get him, will go a good way towards filling our empty barrels."

"Rather rough work, you know," said Dick, "to attack a finback!"

"You are right, Dick," answered the captain; "the boat has yet to be
built which is strong enough to resist the flap of a jubarte's tail."

"But the profit is worth the risk, captain, isn't it?"

"You are right again, Dick," replied Captain Hull, and as he spoke, he
clambered on to the bowsprit in order that he might get a better view
of the whale.

The crew were as eager as their captain. Mounted on the fore-shrouds,
they scanned the movements of their coveted prey in the distance,
freely descanting upon the profit to be made out of a good finback and
declaring that it would be a thousand pities if this chance of filling
the casks below should be permitted to be lost.

Captain Hull was perplexed. He bit his nails and knitted his brow.

"Mamma!" cried little Jack, "I should so much like to see a whale
close,--quite close, you know."

"And so you shall, my boy," replied the captain, who was standing by,
and had come to the resolve that if his men would back him, he would
make an attempt to capture the prize.

He turned to his crew,--

"My men! what do you think? shall we make the venture? Remember, we are
all alone; we have no whalemen to help us; we must rely upon ourselves;
I have thrown a harpoon before now; I can throw a harpoon again; what
do you say?"

The crew responded with a ringing cheer,--

"Ay, ay, sir! Ay, ay!"




CHAPTER VII.

PREPARATIONS FOR AN ATTACK.


Great was the excitement that now prevailed, and the question of an
attempt to capture the sea-monster became the ruling theme of
conversation. Mrs. Weldon expressed considerable doubt as to the
prudence of venturing upon so great a risk with such a limited number
of hands, but when Captain Hull assured her that he had more than once
successfully attacked a whale with a single boat, and that for his part
he had no fear of failure, she made no further remonstrance, and
appeared quite satisfied.

Having formed his resolve, the captain lost no time in setting about
his preliminary arrangements. He could not really conceal from his own
mind that the pursuit of a finback was always a matter of some peril,
and he was anxious, accordingly, to make every possible provision which
forethought could devise against all emergencies.

Besides her long-boat, which was kept between the two masts, the
"Pilgrim" had three whale-boats, two of them slung to the starboard and
larboard davits, and the third at the stern, outside the taffrail.
During the fishing season, when the crew was reinforced by a hired
complement of New Zealand whalemen, all three of these boats would be
brought at once into requisition, but at present the whole crew of the
"Pilgrim" was barely sufficient to man one of the three boats. Tom and
his friends were ready to volunteer their assistance, but any offers of
service from them were necessarily declined; the manipulation of a
whale-boat can only be entrusted to those who are experienced in the
work, as a false turn of the tiller or a premature stroke of the oar
may in a moment compromise the safety of the whole party. Thus
compelled to take all his trained sailors with him on his venturous
expedition, the captain had no alternative than to leave his apprentice
in charge of the schooner during his absence. Dick's choice would have
been very much in favour of taking a share in the whale-hunt, but he
had the good sense to know that the developed strength of a man would
be of far greater service in the boat, and accordingly without a murmur
he resigned himself to remain behind.

Of the five sailors who were to man the boat, there were four to take
the oars, whilst Howick the boatswain was to manage the oar at the
stern, which on these occasions generally replaces an ordinary rudder
as being quicker in action in the event of any of the side oars being
disabled. The post of harpooner was of course assigned to Captain Hull,
to whose lot it would consequently fall first to hurl his weapon at the
whale, then to manage the unwinding of the line to which the harpoon
was attached, and finally to kill the creature by lance-wounds when it
should emerge again from below the sea.

A method sometimes employed for commencing an attack is to place a sort
of small cannon on the bows or deck of the boat and to discharge from
it either a harpoon or some explosive bullets, which make frightful
lacerations on the body of the victim; but the "Pilgrim" was not
provided with apparatus of this description; not only are all the
contrivances of this kind very costly and difficult to manage, but the
fishermen generally are averse to innovations, and prefer the
old-fashioned harpoons. It was with these alone that Captain Hull was
now about to encounter the finback that was lying some four miles
distant from his ship.

The weather promised as favourably as could be for the enterprise. The
sea was calm, and the wind moreover was still moderating, so that there
was no likelihood of the schooner drifting away during the captain's
absence.

When the starboard whale-boat had been lowered, and the four sailors
had entered it, Howick passed a couple of harpoons down to them, and
some lances which had been carefully sharpened; to these were added
five coils of stout and supple rope, each 600 feet long, for a whale
when struck often dives so deeply that even these lengths of line
knotted together are found to be insufficient. After these implements
of attack had been properly stowed in the bows, the crew had only to
await the pleasure of their captain.

The "Pilgrim," before the sailors left her, had been made to heave to,
and the yards were braced so as to secure her remaining as stationary
as possible. As the time drew near for the captain to quit her, he gave
a searching look all round to satisfy himself that everything was in
order; he saw that the halyards were properly tightened, and the sails
trimmed as they should be, and then calling the young apprentice to his
side, he said,--

"Now, Dick, I am going to leave you for a few hours: while I am away, I
hope that it will not be necessary for you to make any movement
whatever. However, you must be on the watch. It is not very likely, but
it is possible that this finback may carry us out to some distance. If
so, you will have to follow; and in that case, I am sure you may rely
upon Tom and his friends for assistance."

One and all, the negroes assured the captain of their willingness to
obey Dick's instructions, the sturdy Hercules rolling up his capacious
shirt-sleeves as if to show that he was ready for immediate action.

The captain went on,--

"The weather is beautifully fine, Dick, and I see no prospect of the
wind freshening; but come what may, I have one direction to give you
which I strictly enforce. You must not leave the ship. If I want you to
follow us, I will hoist a flag on the boat-hook."

"You may trust me, sir," answered Dick; "and I will keep a good
look-out."

"All right, my lad; keep a cool head and a good heart. You are second
captain now, you know. I never heard of any one of your age being
placed in such a post; be a credit to your position!"

Dick blushed, and the bright flush that rose to his cheeks spoke more
than words.

"The lad may be trusted," murmured the captain to himself; "he is as
modest as he is courageous. Yes; he may be trusted."

It cannot be denied that the captain was not wholly without compunction
at the step he was taking; he was aware of the danger to which he was
exposing himself, but he beguiled himself with the persuasion that it
was only for a few hours; and his fisherman's instinct was very keen.
It was not only for himself; the desire upon the part of the crew was
almost irresistibly strong that every opportunity ought to be employed
for making the cargo of the schooner equal to her owner's expectations.
And so he finally prepared to start.

"I wish you all success!" said Mrs. Weldon.

"Many thanks!" he replied.

Little Jack put in his word,--

"And you will try and catch the whale without hurting him much?"

"All right, young gentleman," answered the captain; "he shall hardly
feel the tip of our fingers!"

"Sometimes," said Cousin Benedict, as if he had been pondering the
expedition in relation to his pet science, "sometimes there are strange
insects clinging to the backs of these great mammifers; do you think
you are likely to procure me any specimens?"

"You shall soon have the opportunity of investigating for yourself,"
was the captain's reply.

"And you, Tom; we shall be looking to you for help in cutting up our
prize, when we get it alongside," continued he.

"We shall be quite ready, sir," said the negro.

"One thing more, Dick," added the captain; "you may as well be getting
up the empty barrels out of the hold; they will be all ready."

"It shall be done, sir," answered Dick promptly.

If everything went well it was the intention that the whale after it
had been killed should be towed to the side of the schooner, where it
would be firmly lashed. Then the sailors with their feet in spiked
shoes would get upon its back and proceed to cut the blubber, from head
to tail, in long strips, which would first be divided into lumps about
a foot and a half square, the lumps being subsequently chopped into
smaller portions capable of being stored away in casks. The ordinary
rule would be for a ship, as soon as the flaying was complete, to make
its way to land where the blubber could be at once boiled down, an
operation by which it is reduced by about a third of its weight, and by
which it yields all its oil, the only portion of it which is of any
value. Under present circumstances, however, Captain Hull would not
think of melting down the blubber until his arrival at Valparaiso, and
as he was sanguine that the wind would soon set in a favourable
direction, he calculated that he should reach that port in less than
three weeks, a period during which his cargo would not be deteriorated.

The latest movement with regard to the "Pilgrim" had been to bring her
somewhat nearer the spot where the spouts of vapour indicated the
presence of the coveted prize. The creature continued to swim about in
the reddened waters, opening and shutting its huge jaws like an
automaton, and absorbing at every mouthful whole myriads of animalcula.
No one entertained a fear that it would try to make an escape; it was
the unanimous verdict that it was "a fighting whale," and one that
would resist all attacks to the very end.

As Captain Hull descended the rope-ladder and took his place in the
front of the boat, Mrs. Weldon and all on board renewed their good
wishes.

Dingo stood with his fore paws upon the taffrail, and appeared as much
as any to be bidding the adventurous party farewell.

When the boat pushed off, those who were left on board the "Pilgrim"
made their way slowly to the bows, from which the most extensive view
was to be gained.

The captain's voice came from the retreating boat,--

"A sharp look-out, Dick; a sharp look-out; one eye on us, one on the
ship!"

[Illustration: The Captain's voice came from the retreating boat. _Page
72_]

[Illustration: "I must get you to keep your eye upon that man" _Page
73._]

"Ay, ay, sir," replied the apprentice.

By his gestures the captain showed that he was under some emotion; he
called out again, but the boat had made such headway that it was too
far off for any words to be heard.

Dingo broke out into a piteous howl.

The dog was still standing erect, his eye upon the boat in the
distance. To the sailors, ever superstitious, the howling was not
reassuring. Even Mrs. Weldon was startled.

"Why, Dingo, Dingo," she exclaimed, "this isn't the way to encourage
your friends. Come here, sir; you must behave better than that!"

Sinking down on all fours the animal walked slowly up to Mrs. Weldon,
and began to lick her hand.

"Ah!" muttered old Tom, shaking his head solemnly, "he doesn't wag his
tail at all. A bad omen."

All at once the dog gave a savage growl.

As she turned her head, Mrs Weldon caught sight of Negoro making his
way to the forecastle, probably actuated by the general spirit of
curiosity to follow the maneuvers of the whale-boat. He stopped and
seized a handspike as soon as he saw the ferocious attitude of the dog.

The lady was quite unable to pacify the animal, which seemed about to
fly upon the throat of the cook, but Dick Sands called out loudly,--

"Down, Dingo, down!"

The dog obeyed; but it seemed to be with extreme reluctance that he
returned to Dick's side; he continued to growl, as if still remembering
his rage. Negoro had turned very pale, and having put down the
handspike, made his way cautiously back to his own quarters.

"Hercules," said Dick, "I must get you to keep your eye upon that man."

"Yes, I will," he answered, significantly clenching his fists.

Dick took his station at the helm, whence he kept an earnest watch upon
the whale-boat, which under the vigourous plying of the seamen's oars
had become little more than a speck upon the water.




CHAPTER VIII.

A CATASTROPHE.


Experienced whaleman as he was, Captain Hull knew the difficulty of the
task he had undertaken, he was alive to the importance of making his
approach to the whale from the leeward, so that there should be no
sound to apprize the creature of the proximity of the boat. He had
perfect confidence in his boatswain, and felt sure that he would take
the proper course to insure a favourable result to the enterprise.

"We mustn't show ourselves too soon, Howick," he said.

"Certainly not," replied Howick, "I am going to skirt the edge of the
discoloured water, and I shall take good care to get well to leeward."

"All right," the captain answered, and turning to the crew said, "now,
my lads, as quietly as you can."

Muffling the sound of their oars by placing straw in the rowlocks, and
avoiding the least unnecessary noise, the men skilfully propelled the
boat along the outline of the water tinged by the crustacea, so that
while the starboard oars still dipped in the green and limpid sea, the
larboard were in the deep-dyed waves, and seemed as though they were
dripping with blood.

"Wine on this side, water on that," said one of the sailors jocosely.

"But neither of them fit to drink," rejoined the captain sharply, "so
just hold your tongue!"

Under Howick's guidance the boat now glided stealthily on to the greasy
surface of the reddened waters, where she appeared to float as on a
pool of oil. The whale seemed utterly unconscious of the attack that
was threatening it, and allowed the boat to come nearer without
exhibiting any sign of alarm.

[Illustration: The whale seemed utterly unconscious of the attack that
was threatening it]

The wide circuit which the captain had thought it advisable to take had
the effect of considerably increasing the distance between his boat and
the "Pilgrim," whilst the strange rapidity with which objects at sea
become diminished in apparent magnitude, as if viewed through the wrong
end of a telescope, made the ship look farther away than she actually
was.

Another half-hour elapsed, and at the end of it the captain found
himself so exactly to leeward that the huge body of the whale was
precisely intermediate between his boat and the "Pilgrim." A closer
approach must now be made; every precaution must be used; but the time
had come to get sufficiently near for the harpoon to be discharged.

"Slowly, my men," said the captain, in a low voice; "slowly and softly!"

Howick muttered something that implied that the whale had ceased
blowing so hard, and that it was aware of their approach; the captain,
upon this, enjoined the most perfect silence, but urged his crew
onwards, until, in five or six minutes, they were within a cable's
length of the finback. Erect at the stern the boatswain stood, and
manoeuvred to get the boat as close as possible to the whale's left
flank, while he made it an object of special care to keep beyond the
reach of its formidable tail, one stroke of which could involve them
all in instantaneous disaster.

The manipulation of the boat thus left to the boatswain, the captain
made ready for the arduous effort that was before him. At the extreme
bow, harpoon in hand, with his legs somewhat astride so as to insure
his equilibrium, he stood prepared to plunge his weapon into the mass
that rose above the surface of the sea. By his side, coiled in a pail,
and with one end firmly attached to the harpoon, was the first of the
five lines which if the whale should dive to a considerable depth,
would have to be joined end to end, one after another.

"Are you ready, my lads?" said he, hardly above a whisper.

"Ay, ay, sir," replied Howick, speaking as gently as his master, and
giving a firmer grip to the rudder-oar that he held in his hands.

"Then, alongside at once," was the captain's order, which was promptly
obeyed, so that in a few minutes the boat was only about ten feet from
the body of the whale. The animal did not move. Was it asleep? In that
case there was hope that the very first stroke might be fatal. But it
was hardly likely. Captain Hull felt only too sure that there was some
different cause to be assigned for its remaining so still and
stationary; and the rapid glances of the boatswain showed that he
entertained the same suspicion. But it was no time for speculation; the
moment for action had arrived, and no attempt was made on either hand
to exchange ideas upon the subject.

Captain Hull seized his weapon tightly by the shaft, and having poised
it several times in the air, in order to make more sure of his aim, he
gathered all his strength and hurled it against the side of the finback.

"Backwater!" he shouted.

The sailors pushed back with all their might, and the boat in an
instant was beyond the range of the creature's tail.

And now the immoveableness of the animal was at once accounted for.

"See; there's a youngster!" exclaimed Howick.

And he was not mistaken. Startled by the blow of the harpoon the
monster had heeled over on to its side, and the movement revealed a
young whale which the mother had been disturbed in the act of suckling.
It was a discovery which made Captain Hull aware that the capture of
the whale would be attended with double difficulty; he knew; that she
would defend "her little one" (if such a term can be applied to a
creature that was at least twenty feet long) with the most determined
fury; yet having made what he considered a successful commencement of
the attack, he would not be daunted, nor deterred from his endeavour to
secure so fine a prize.

The whale did not, as sometimes happens, make a precipitate dash upon
the boat, a proceeding which necessitates the instant cutting of the
harpoon-line, and an immediate retreat, but it took the far more usual
course of diving downwards almost perpendicularly. It was followed by
its calf; very soon, however, after rising once again to the surface
with a sudden bound, it began swimming along under water with great
rapidity.

Before its first plunge Captain Hull and Howick had sufficient
opportunity to observe that it was an unusually large balaenoptera,
measuring at least eighty feet from head to tail, its colour being of a
yellowish-brown, dappled with numerous spots of a darker shade.

The pursuit, or what may be more aptly termed "the towing," of the
whale had now fairly commenced. The sailors had shipped their oars, and
the whale-boat darted like an arrow along the surface of the waves. In
spite of the oscillation, which was very violent, Howick succeeded in
maintaining equilibrium, and did not need the repeated injunctions with
which the agitated captain urged his boatswain to be upon his guard.

But fast as the boat flew along, she could not keep pace with the
whale, and so rapidly did the line run out that except proper care had
been taken to keep the bucket in which it was coiled filled with water,
the friction against the edge of the boat would inevitably have caused
it to take fire. The whale gave no indication of moderating its speed,
so that the first line was soon exhausted, and the second had to be
attached to its end, only to be run out with like rapidity. In a few
minutes more it was necessary to join on the third line; it was evident
that the whale had not been hit in a vital part, and so far from rising
to the surface, the oblique direction of the rope indicated that the
creature was seeking yet greater depths.

"Confound it!" exclaimed the captain; "it seems as if the brute is
going to run out all our line."

"Yes; and see what a distance the animal is dragging us away from the
'Pilgrim,'" answered Howick.

"Sooner or later, however," said Captain Hull, "the thing must come to
the surface; she is not a fish, you know."

"She is saving her breath for the sake of her speed," said one of the
sailors with a grin.

But grin as he might, both he and his companions began to look serious
when the fourth line had to be added to the third, and more serious
still when the fifth was added to the fourth. The captain even began to
mutter imprecations upon the refractory brute that was putting their
patience to so severe a test.

The last line was nearly all uncoiled, and the general consternation
was growing very great, when there was observed to be a slight
slackening in the tension.

"Thank Heaven!" cried the captain; "the beast has tired herself out at
last."

Casting his eye towards the "Pilgrim," he saw at a glance that she
could not be less than five miles to leeward. It was a long distance,
but when, according to his arrangement, he had hoisted the flag on the
boat-hook which was to be the signal for the ship to approach, he had
the satisfaction of seeing that Dick Sands and the negroes at once
began bracing the yards to get as near as possible to the wind. The
breeze, however, blew only in short, unsteady puffs, and it was only
too evident that the "Pilgrim" would have considerable difficulty in
working her way to the whale-boat, even if she succeeded at last.

Meantime, just as had been expected, the whale had risen to the surface
of the water, the harpoon still fixed firmly in her side. She remained
motionless, apparently waiting for her calf, which she had far
out-distanced in her mad career. Captain Hull ordered his men to pull
towards her as rapidly as they could, and on getting close up, two of
the sailors, following the captain's example, shipped their oars and
took up the long lances with which the whale was now to be attacked.
Howick held himself in readiness to sheer off quickly in the event of
the finback making a turn towards the boat.

"Now, my lads!" shouted the captain. "Look out! take a good aim! no
false shots! Are you ready, Howick?"

"Quite ready, captain," answered the boatswain, adding, "but it
perplexes me altogether to see the brute so quiet all of a sudden."

"It looks suspicious," said the captain; "but never mind; go on!
straight ahead!"

Captain Hull was becoming more excited every moment.

During the time the boat was approaching, the whale had only turned
round a little in the water without changing its position. It was
evidently still looking for its calf, which was not to be seen by its
side. All of a sudden it gave a jerk with its tail which carried it
some few yards away.

The men were all excited. Was the beast going to escape again? Was the
fatiguing pursuit all to come over a second time? Must not the chase be
abandoned? Would not the prize have to be given up?

But no: the whale was not starting on another flight; it had merely
turned so as to face the boat, and now rapidly beating the water with
its enormous fins, it commenced a frantic dash forwards.

"Look out, Howick, she's coming!" shouted Captain Hull.

The skilful boatswain was all on the alert; the boat swerved, as if by
instinct, so as to avoid the blow, and as the whale passed furiously
by, she received three tremendous thrusts from the lances of the
captain and the two men, who all endeavoured to strike at some vital
part. There was a sudden pause. The whale spouted up two gigantic
columns of blood and water, lashed its tail, and, with bounds and
plunges that were terrible to behold, renewed its angry attack upon the
boat.

None but the most determined of whalemen could fail to lose their head
under such an assault. Calm and collected, however, the crew remained.
Once again did Howick adroitly sheer aside, and once again did the
three lances do their deadly work upon the huge carcase as it rolled
impetuously past; but this time, so great was the wave that was caused
by the infuriated animal, that the boat was well-nigh full of water,
and in imminent danger of being capsized.

"Bale away, men!" cried the captain.

Putting down their oars, the other sailors set to work baling with all
their might. Captain Hull cut the harpoon-line, now no longer required,
because the whale, maddened with pain and grief for the loss of its
offspring, would certainly make no further attempt to escape, but would
fight desperately to the very end.

The finback was obviously bent on a third onslaught upon the boat,
which, being in spite of all the men's exertions still more than half
full of water, no longer answered readily to the rudder-oar.

No one thought of flight. The swiftest boat could be overtaken in a
very few bounds. There was no alternative but to face the encounter. It
was not long in coming. Their previous good fortune failed them. The
whale in passing caught the boat with such a violent blow from its
dorsal fin, that the men lost their footing and the lances missed their
mark.

"Where's Howick?" screamed the captain in alarm.

"Here I am, captain; all right!" replied the boatswain, who had
scrambled to his feet only to find that the oar with which he had been
steering was snapped in half.

"The rudder's smashed," he said.

"Take another, Howick; quick!" cried the captain.

But scarcely had he time to replace the broken oar, when a bubbling was
heard a few yards away from the boat, and the young whale made its
appearance on the surface of the sea. Catching sight of it instantly,
the mother made a fresh dash in its direction, the maternal instincts
were aroused, and the contest must become more deadly than ever.

Captain Hull looked towards the "Pilgrim," and waved his signal
frantically above his head. It was, however, with no hope of succour;
he was only too well aware that no human efforts could effectually
hasten the arrival of the ship. Dick Sands indeed had at once obeyed
the first summons: already the wind was filling the sails, but in
default of steam power her progress at best could not be otherwise than
slow. Not only did Dick feel convinced that it would be a useless waste
of time to lower a boat and come off with the negroes to the rescue,
but he remembered the strict orders he had received on no account to
quit the ship. Captain Hull, however, could perceive that the
apprentice had had the aft-boat lowered, and was towing it along, so
that it should be in readiness for a refuge as soon as they should get
within reach.

[Illustration: The boat was well nigh full of water, and in imminent
danger of being capsized]

But the whale, close at hand, demanded attention that could ill be
spared for the yet distant ship. Covering her young one with her body,
she was manifestly designing another charge full upon the boat.

"On your guard, Howick! sheer off!" bellowed the captain.

But the order was useless. The fresh oar that the boatswain had taken
to replace the broken one was considerably shorter, and consequently it
failed in lever-power. There was, in fact, no helm for the boat to
answer. The sailors saw the failure, and convinced that all was lost
uttered one long, despairing cry that might have been heard on board
the "Pilgrim." Another moment, and from beneath there came a tremendous
blow from the monster's tail that sent the boat flying in the air. In
fragments it fell back again into a sea that was lashed into fury by
the angry flapping of the finback's fins.

Was it not possible for the unfortunate men, bleeding and wounded as
they were, still to save themselves by clinging to some floating spar?
Captain Hull is indeed seen endeavouring to hoist the boatswain on to a
drifting plank. But all in vain. There is no hope. The whale, writhing
in the convulsions of death, returns yet once again to the attack; the
waters around the struggling sailors seethe and foam. A brief turmoil
follows as if there were the bursting of some vast waterspout.

In a quarter of an hour afterwards, Dick Sands, with the negroes,
reaches the scene of the catastrophe. All is still and desolate. Every
living object has vanished. Nothing is visible except a few fragments
of the whale-boat floating on the blood-stained water.

[Illustration: There is no hope.]




CHAPTER IX.

DICK'S PROMOTION.


The first feeling experienced by those on board the "Pilgrim," after
witnessing the terrible disaster was one of grief and horror at the
fearful death that had befallen the victims. Captain Hull and his men
had been swept away before their very eyes, and they had been powerless
to assist. Not one was saved; the schooner had reached the spot too
late to offer the least resistance to the attacks of the formidable
sea-monster.

When Dick and the negroes returned to the ship after their hopeless
search, with only the corroboration of their sad foreboding that
captain and crew had disappeared for ever, Mrs. Weldon sank upon her
knees; little Jack knelt beside her crying bitterly; and Dick, old Nan,
and all the negroes stood reverently around her whilst with great
devoutness the lady offered up the prayer of commendation for the souls
of the departing. All sympathized heartily with her supplications, nor
was there any diminution of their fervour when she proceeded to implore
that the survivors might have strength and courage for their own hour
of need.

The situation was indeed very grave. Here was the "Pilgrim" in the
middle of the Pacific, hundreds of miles away from the nearest land,
without captain, without crew, at the mercy of the wind and waves. It
was a strange fatality that had brought the whale across their path; it
was a fatality stranger still that had induced her captain, a man of no
ordinary prudence, to risk even his life for the sake of making good a
deficient cargo. It was an event almost unknown in the annals of
whale-fishing that not a single man in the whale-boat should escape
alive; nevertheless, it was all too true; and now, of all those left on
board, Dick Sands, the apprentice-boy of fifteen years of age, was the
sole individual who had the slightest knowledge of the management of a
ship; the negroes, brave and willing as they were, were perfectly
ignorant of seamen's duties; and, to crown all, here was a lady with
her child on board, for whose safety the commander of the vessel would
be held responsible.

Such were the facts which presented themselves to the mind of Dick as,
with folded arms, he stood gazing gloomily at the spot where Captain
Hull, his esteemed benefactor, had sunk to rise no more. The lad raised
his eyes sadly; he scanned the horizon with the vain hope that he might
perchance descry some passing vessel to which he could confide Mrs.
Weldon and her son; for himself, his mind was made up; he had already
resolved that nothing should induce him to quit the "Pilgrim" until he
had exhausted every energy in trying to carry her into port.

The ocean was all deserted. Since the disappearance of the whale
nothing had broken the monotonous surface either of sea or sky. The
apprentice, short as his experience was, knew enough to be aware that
he was far out of the common track alike of merchantmen or whalers; he
would not buoy himself up with false expectations; he would look his
situation full and fairly in the face; he would do his best, and trust
hopefully in guidance from the Power above.

Thus absorbed in his meditations he did not observe that he was not
alone. Negoro, who had gone below immediately after the catastrophe,
had again come back upon deck. What this mysterious character had felt
upon witnessing the awful calamity it would be impossible to say.
Although with his eye he had keenly taken in every detail of the
melancholy spectacle, every muscle of, his face had remained unmoved;
not a gesture, not a word betrayed the least emotion. Even if he had
heard, he had taken no part, nor evinced the faintest interest in Mrs.
Weldon's outpouring of prayer.

He had made his way to the stern, where Dick Sands was pondering over
the responsibilities of his own position, and stood looking towards the
apprentice without interrupting his reverie.

Catching sight of him, Dick roused himself in an instant, and said,--

"You want to speak to me?"

"I must speak either to the captain or the boatswain," answered the man.

"Negoro," said Dick sharply, "you know as well as I do, that they are
both drowned."

"Then where am I to get my orders from?" asked the fellow insolently.

"From me," promptly rejoined the apprentice.

"From you! from a boy of fifteen?"

"Yes, from me," repeated Dick, in a firm and resolute voice, looking at
the man until he recoiled under his gaze. "From _me_."

Mrs. Weldon had heard what passed.

"I wish every one on board to understand," she interposed, "that Dick
Sands is captain now. Orders must be taken from him, and they must be
obeyed."

Negoro frowned, bit his lip, sneered, and having muttered something
that was unintelligible, made his way back to his cabin.

Meantime, the schooner under the freshening breeze had been carried
beyond the shoal of the crustaceans. Dick cast his eye first at the
sails, then along the deck, and seemed to become more and more alive to
the weight of the obligation that had fallen upon him; but his heart
did not fail him; he was conscious that the hopes of the passengers
centred in himself, and he was determined to let them see that he would
do his best not to disappoint them.

Although he was satisfied of his capability, with the help of the
negroes, to manipulate the sails, he was conscious of a defect of the
scientific knowledge which was requisite for properly controlling the
ship's course. He felt the want of a few more years' experience. If
only he had had longer practice he would, he thought, have been as able
as Captain Hull himself, to use the sextant, to take the altitude of
the stars, to read the time from his chronometer; sun, moon, and
planets, should have been his guides; from the firmament, as from a
dial-plate, he would have gathered the teachings of his true position;
but all this was beyond him as yet; his knowledge went no further than
the use of the log and compass, and by these alone he must be content
to make his reckonings. But he kept up his courage, and did not permit
himself for one moment to despair of ultimate success.

Mrs. Weldon needed little penetration to recognize the thoughts which
were passing in the mind of the resolute youth.

"I see you have come to your decision, Dick," she said. "The command of
the ship is in your hands; no fear but that you will do your duty; and
Tom, and the rest of them, no doubt, will render you every assistance
in their power."

"Yes, Mrs. Weldon," rejoined Dick brightly; "and before long I shall
hope to make them good seamen. If only the weather lasts fair,
everything will go on well enough; and if the weather turns out bad, we
must not despond; we will get safe ashore."

He paused a moment and added reverently,--

"God helping us."

Mrs. Weldon proceeded to inquire whether he had any means of
ascertaining the "Pilgrim's" present position. He replied that the
ship's chart would at once settle that. Captain Hull had kept the
reckoning accurately right up to the preceding day.

"And what do you propose to do next?" she asked. "Of course you
understand that in our present circumstances we are not in the least
bound to go to Valparaiso if there is a nearer port which we could
reach."

"Certainly not," replied Dick; "and therefore it is my intention to
sail due east, as by following that course we are sure to come upon
some part of the American coast."

[Illustration: "Oh, we shall soon be on shore!"]

"Do your best, Dick, to let us get ashore somewhere."

"Never fear, madam," he answered; "as we get nearer land we shall be
almost sure to fall in with a cruiser which will put us into the right
track. If the wind does but remain in the north-west, and allow us to
carry plenty of sail, we shall get on famously."

He spoke with the cheery confidence of a good sailor who knows the good
ship beneath his feet. He had moved off a few steps to go and take the
helm, when Mrs. Weldon, calling him back, reminded him that he had not
yet ascertained the true position of the schooner. Dick confessed that
it ought to be done at once, and going to the captain's cabin brought
out the chart upon which the ill-fated commander had marked the
bearings the evening before. According to this dead-reckoning they were
in lat. 43° 35', S., and long. 164° 13', W.; and as the schooner had
made next to no progress during the last twenty-four eventful hours,
the entry might fairly be accepted as representing approximately their
present position.

To the lady's inexperienced eye, as she bent over the outspread chart,
it seemed that the land, as represented by the brown patch which
depicted the continent of South America extending like a barrier
between two oceans from Cape Horn to Columbia, was, after all, not so
very far distant; the wide space of the Pacific was not so broad but
that it would be quickly traversed.

"Oh, we shall soon be on shore!" she said.

But Dick knew better. He had acquaintance enough with the scale upon
which the chart was constructed to be aware that the "Pilgrim" herself
would have been a speck like a microscopic infusoria on the vast
surface of that sea, and that hundreds and hundreds of weary miles
separated her from the coast.

No time was to be lost. Contrary winds had ceased to blow; a fresh
north-westerly breeze had sprung up, and the _cirri_, or curl-cloud:
overhead indicated that for some time at least the direction of the
wind would be unchanged.

Dick appealed to the negroes, and tried to make them appreciate the
difficulty of the task that had fallen to his lot. Tom answered, in
behalf of himself and all the rest, that they were not only willing,
but anxious, to do all they could to assist him, saying that if their
knowledge was small, yet their arms were strong, and added that they
should certainly be obedient to every order he gave.

"My friends," said Dick, addressing them in reply; "I shall make it a
point of myself taking the helm as much as possible. But you know I
must have my proper rest sometimes. No one can live without sleep. Now,
Tom, I intend you to stand by me for the remainder of the day. I will
try and make you understand how to steer by the aid of the compass. It
is not difficult. You will soon learn. I shall have to leave you when I
go to my hammock for an hour or two."

"Is there nothing," said little Jack, "that I can learn to do?"

"Oh yes, Jack; you shall keep the wind in order," answered Dick,
smiling.

"That I will!" cried the child, clapping his hands, while the mother
drew him to her side.

"And now, my men," was Dick's first order to his crew, "we must brace
in the yards to sail fair. I will show you how."

"All right, Captain Sands; we are at your service," said old Tom
gravely.

[Illustration: "Oh yes, Jack; you shall keep the wind in order."]




CHAPTER X.

THE NEW CREW.


Dick Sands, captain of the "Pilgrim," would not lose a moment in
getting his ship under sail. His prime object was to land his
passengers safely at Valparaiso or some other American port, and to
accomplish his purpose it was in the first place necessary that he
should ascertain the schooner's rate of speed and the direction that
she was taking. This information was to be obtained readily enough by
means of the log and compass, and the result of each day's observations
would be entered regularly on the chart.

The log on board was a patent log, with a dial-plate and screw, by
means of which the distance that is travelled can be measured
accurately for any definite time; it was an instrument so simple that
the negroes were very soon taught its use. The slight error in the
reckoning caused by the action of the currents could only be rectified
by astronomical observations, which, as already has been stated, were
beyond Dick's attainments to make.

The idea more than once crossed Dick's mind whether he would not take
the "Pilgrim" back again to New Zealand; the distance was considerably
less than it was to America, and had the wind remained in the quarter
whence it had been blowing so long, it is more than likely he would
have determined to retrace his course. But as the wind had now veered
to the north-west, and there was every probability that it was settled
for a time, he came to the conclusion that he had better take advantage
of it and persevere in making his way towards the east. Accordingly he
lost no time in putting his ship before the wind.

On a schooner the fore-mast usually carries four square sails; on the
lower mast a fore-sail; on the top-mast a top-sail; on the top-gallant
a top-gallant-sail and a royal. The main-mast carries only a main-sail
and a top-sail. Between the masts upon the fore-stays can be hoisted a
triple tier of triangular sails; while the bowsprit with its jib-boom
will carry the three jibs.

The jibs, the main-sail, the main-top-sail and the staysails are all
managed with comparative ease, because they can be hoisted from the
deck without the necessity of ascending the mast to let fly the
robbins, by which they are fastened to the yards. With the sails on the
fore-mast it is altogether a more difficult business. In order either
to unfurl them, to take them in, or to reef them, it is necessary for a
man to clamber up by the shrouds, either to the fore-top, or to the
top-gallant cross-trees, and thence mounting by loose ropes, extended
below the yards, to hold on by one hand whilst he does his work with
the other. The operation requires alike the head and arm of an
experienced mariner; and when a fresh breeze has been blowing, it is a
casualty far from uncommon that a sailor, confused by the flapping of
the canvas and the pitching of the vessel, should be blown overboard in
the act. For the unpractised negroes the danger would necessarily be
very great. However, the wind at present was very moderate, and the
ship ploughed her way over the waves without any violent oscillations.

At the time when Dick Sands, in obedience to the signal he received
from Captain Hull, proceeded to make his way to the scene of the
disaster, the "Pilgrim," as she lay to, was carrying only her jibs,
main-sail, fore-sail, and fore-top-sail. In order, therefore, to put
her as near as possible to the wind, it had been merely necessary to
counter-brace the fore-sail yard, a manoeuvre in which the negroes had
rendered all the assistance that was necessary. It was requisite now to
do something more. To enable him to get straight before the wind Dick
wanted to increase his sail, and was desirous of hoisting the
top-gallant, the royal, the main-top-sail, and the stay-sails.

He was himself standing at the wheel.

"Now, my men," he shouted to the negroes; "I want your help. Do exactly
as I tell you. Bear away, Tom!"

Tom looked puzzled.

"Bear away! unfasten that rope, I mean. And, Bat, come along; do the
same as Tom."

The men did what they were bidden.

"That's right!" continued Dick, and calling to Hercules, said,--

"Now, Hercules; a good strong pull!"

To give such a direction to Hercules was somewhat imprudent; the
rigging creaked again under his giant strength.

"Gently, gently, my good fellow!" said Dick, laughing; "you will have
the mast down."

"I declare I hardly touched the rope," answered Hercules.

"Well, next time, you must only pretend to touch it," said Dick; and,
continuing his orders, shouted, "Now slacken! let fly! make fast! now
brace in the yards! all right! that's capital!"

The yards were loosened, the foresails turned slowly round, and,
catching the breeze, gave a slight impetus to the ship. Dick's next
orders were for the jib-sheets to be set free, and then he called the
men to the stern.

"Now," said he; "we must look to the main-mast; but take care,
Hercules, not to have it down."

"I will be as careful as possible, Mr. Dick," submissively replied
Hercules, as though he were afraid to commit himself to any rash
promise.

The manoeuvre was simple enough. The main-sheet was gradually
slackened, the great sail took the wind and added its powerful action
to that of the fore-sails. The main-top-sail was next brought to bear;
it was only clewed up, so that there was nothing to do except to pull
the halyards, haul it aboard the tack, and unfurl it. But in pulling at
the halyards the muscular energy of Hercules, which was supplemented by
that of Actæon, not to forget little Jack, who had volunteered his
assistance, proved to be overpowering, and the rope snapped in two. All
three of them, of course, fell flat upon the deck; but fortunately
neither of them was hurt, and Jack laughed heartily at his tumble as an
excellent joke.

"Up with you!" cried Captain Dick; "there's no harm done; splice the
rope, and haul away more gently next time."

It took but a few minutes to execute the order, and the "Pilgrim" was
soon sailing away rapidly with her head to the east.

"Well done, my friends!" said Dick, who had not left his post at the
helm; "you will be first-rate sailors before the end of the voyage."

"We shall do our best, I promise you, Captain Sands," replied Tom,
making it a point to give the young commander his proper title.

Mrs. Weldon also congratulated the new crew upon the success of their
first attempt.

"I believe it was Master Jack who broke that rope," said Hercules, with
a sly twinkle in his eye; "he is very strong, I can tell you."

Jack looked as though he thoroughly appreciated the compliment, and
evidenced his satisfaction by giving his huge friend a hearty shake of
the hand.

There were still several sails that were not yet set. Running well
before the wind as the "Pilgrim" was, Dick nevertheless felt that the
gallant, royal, and stay-sails, if brought into service, would
materially assist her progress, and he determined not to dispense with
their help. The stay-sails could be hoisted from below, but to bring
the gallant and royal into play demanded more experience than any of
his crew had had. Knowing that he could not entrust the task to them,
and yet resolved not to be baulked of his wish to set them, he
undertook the task himself. He first put Tom to the helm, showing him
how to keep the schooner's head in the right direction, and having
placed the other four at the royal and top-gallant halyards, proceeded
to mount the foremast.

[Illustration: All three of them fell flat upon the deck.]

To clamber up the foreshrouds and the top-shrouds on to the cross-trees
was mere child's play to the active apprentice. In a few minutes he had
unfurled the top-gallant-sail, mounted to the royal-yard, unfurled the
royal, again reached the cross-trees, and having caught hold of one of
the starboard backstays, had descended to the deck; there he gave the
necessary directions, and the two sails were made fast, and both yards
braced.

Nor did this content him. The stay-sails were set between the masts,
and thus the "Pilgrim" was running along, crowded to the full, with all
her canvas. The only additional sails which Dick could possibly have
employed would have been some studding-sails to larboard, but as the
setting of these was a matter of some difficulty, and they were not
always readily struck in the case of a sudden squall, he contented
himself without them.

Again he took his place at the helm. The breeze was manifestly
freshening, and the "Pilgrim," almost imperceptibly heeling to
starboard, glided rapidly along the surface of the water, leaving
behind her a wake, smooth and clean, that bore plain witness to the
true adjustment of her water-line.

"This is good progress, Mrs. Weldon," he said; "may Heaven grant the
wind and weather may continue thus favourable!"

The lady, in silence, shook the boy's hand; and then, worn-out with the
excitement of the past hours, went to her cabin, where she lay down and
fell into a troubled doze.

The new crew remained on watch. They were stationed on the forecastle,
in readiness to make any alteration which the sails might require, but
the wind was so steady and unshifting that no need arose for their
services.

And Cousin Benedict? all this time, where was he? and what had he been
doing?

He was sitting in his cabin; he had a magnifying-glass in his hand and
was studying an articulata of the order orthoptera, an insect of the
Blattidae family; its characteristics are a roundish body, rather long
wings, flat elytra, and a head hidden by the prothorax. He had been on
deck at the time of the calamity; the ill-fated captain with the crew
had been drowned before his very eyes; but he said nothing; not that he
was unmoved; to think that he was not struck with horror would be to
libel his kind and pitying nature. His sympathy was aroused, especially
for his cousin; he pressed her hand warmly as if he would assure her of
his truest commiseration; but he said nothing; he hurried off towards
his cabin; and who shall deny that it was to devise some wonderfully
energetic measures that he would take in consequence of this melancholy
event?

Passing the kitchen, however, he caught sight of Negoro in the act of
crushing a blatta, an American species of cockroach. He broke out into
a storm of invective, and in tones of indignation demanded the
surrender of the insect, which Negoro made with cool contempt. In a
moment Captain Hull and his partners in death were all forgotten; the
enthusiast had secured a prize with which he hastened to his own little
compartment, where he was soon absorbed in proving to his own
satisfaction, in opposition to the opinion of other entomologists, that
the blattae of the phoraspous species, which are remarkable for their
colours, differ in their habits from blattae of the ordinary sort.

For the remainder of the day perfect order reigned on board the
"Pilgrim." Though they were unable to shake off the sickening feeling
of horror roused by the frightful disaster, and felt that they had
sustained a startling shock, all the passengers seemed mechanically to
fall into their usual routine. Dick Sands, though avowedly at the
wheel, seemed to be everywhere, with an eye for every thing, and his
amateur crew obeyed him readily, and with the promptness of a willing
activity.

Negoro made no further overt attempt to question the young captain's
authority, but remained shut up in his kitchen. Dick made no secret of
his determination to place the cook in close confinement if he
exhibited any future sign of insubordination. Hercules was ready to
carry him off bodily to the hold, and old Nan was equally ready to take
his place in the cooking department. Probably Negoro was aware of all
this; at any rate he did not seem disposed to give any further cause of
offence at present.

[Illustration: Jack evidenced his satisfaction by giving his huge
friend a hearty shake of the hand.]

As the day advanced the wind continued to freshen; but no shifting of
the sails seemed necessary. The "Pilgrim" was running well. There was
no need to diminish her spread of canvas. Masts as solid and rigging as
strong as hers could stand a far heavier breeze.

As a general rule, it is deemed prudent in case of a squall to shorten
sail at night, and especially to take in gallants and royal; but the
weather prospects now were all so promising and satisfactory that Dick
persuaded himself he was under no necessity to take this precaution; he
rather felt himself bound to take the strongest measures he could to
expedite his reaching less unfrequented waters. He made up his mind,
however, not to leave the deck at all that night.

The young captain made every effort to get an approximate reckoning of
the schooner's progress. He heaved the log every half-hour and duly
registered the result of each successive examination. There were two
compasses on board; one in the binnacle, close under the eye of the
helmsman, the other, an inverted compass, being attached to the rafters
of the captain's cabin, so that without leaving his berth he could see
whether the man in charge of the wheel was holding a proper course.

Every vessel that is duly furnished for a lengthened voyage has always
not only two compasses but two chronometers, one to correct the other.
The "Pilgrim" was not deficient in this respect, and Dick Sands made a
strong point of admonishing his crew that they should take especial
care of the compasses, which under their present circumstances were of
such supreme importance.

A misfortune, however, was in store for them. On the night of the 12th,
while Dick was on watch, the compass in the cabin became detached from
its fastening and fell on the floor. The accident was not discovered
until the following morning. Whether the metal ferule that had attached
the instrument to the rafters had become rusty, or whether it had been
worn away by additional friction it seemed impossible to settle. All
that could be said was that the compass was broken beyond repair. Dick
was extremely grieved at the loss; but he did not consider that any one
was to be blamed for the mishap, and could only resolve for the future
to take extra care of the compass in the binnacle.

With the exception of this _contretemps_, everything appeared to go on
satisfactorily on board. Mrs. Weldon, reassured by Dick's confidence,
had regained much of her wonted calmness, and was besides ever
supported by a sincere religious spirit. She and Dick had many a long
conversation together. The ingenuous lad was always ready to take the
kind and intelligent lady into his counsel, and day by day would point
out to her on the chart the registers he made as the result of his dead
reckoning; he would then try and satisfy her that under the prevailing
wind there could be no doubt they must arrive at the coast of South
America: moreover, he said that, unless he was much mistaken, they
should sight the land at no great distance from Valparaiso.

Mrs. Weldon had, in truth, no reason to question the correctness of
Dick's representations; she owned that provided the wind remained in
the same favourable quarter, there was every prospect of their reaching
land in safety; nevertheless at times she could not resist the
misgiving that would arise when she contemplated what might be the
result of a change of wind or a breaking of the weather.

With the light-heartedness that belonged to his age, Jack soon fell
back into his accustomed pursuits, and was to be seen merrily running
over the deck or romping with Dingo. At times, it is true, he missed
the companionship of Dick; but his mother made him comprehend that now
that Dick, was captain, his time was too much occupied to allow him;
any leisure for play, and the child quite understood that he must not
interrupt his old friend in his new duties.

[Illustration: A light shadow glided stealthily along the deck.]

The negroes performed their work with intelligence, and seemed to make
rapid progress in the art of seamanship. Tom had been unanimously
appointed boatswain, and took one watch with Bat and Austin, the
alternate watch being discharged by Dick himself with Hercules and
Actæon. One of them steered so that the other two were free to watch at
the bows. As a general rule Dick Sands managed to remain at the wheel
all night; five or six hours' sleep in the daytime sufficed for him,
and during the time when he was lying down he entrusted the wheel to
Tom or Bat, who under his instructions had become very fair helmsmen.
Although in these unfrequented waters there was little chance of
running foul of any other vessel, Dick invariably took the precaution
of lighting his signals, carrying a green light to starboard and a red
light to port. His exertions, however, were a great strain upon him,
and sometimes during the night his fatigue would induce a heavy
drowsiness, and he steered, as it were, by instinct more than by
attention.

On the night of the 13th, he was so utterly worn-out that he was
obliged to ask Tom to relieve him at the helm whilst he went down for a
few hours' rest. Actæon and Hercules remained on watch on the
forecastle.

The night was very dark; the sky was covered with heavy clouds that had
formed in the chill evening air, and the sails on the top-masts were
lost in the obscurity. At the stern, the lamps on either side of the
binnacle cast a faint reflection on the metal mountings of the wheel,
leaving the deck generally in complete darkness.

Towards three o'clock in the morning Tom was getting so heavy with
sleepiness that he was almost unconscious. His eye, long fixed steadily
on the compass, lost its power of vision, and he fell into a doze from
which it would require more than a slight disturbance to arouse him.

Meantime a light shadow glided stealthily along the deck. Creeping
gradually up to the binnacle, Negoro put down something heavy that he
had brought in his hand. He stole a keen and rapid glance at the dial
of the compass, and made his way back, unseen and unheard as he had
come.

Almost immediately afterwards, Tom awakened from his slumber. His eye
fell instinctively on the compass, and he saw in a moment that the ship
was out of her proper course. By a turn of the helm he brought her head
to what he supposed to be the east. But he was mistaken. During his
brief interval of unconsciousness a piece of iron had been deposited
beneath the magnetic needle, which by this means had been diverted
thirty degrees to the right, and, instead of pointing due north,
inclined far towards north-east.

Consequently it came to pass that the "Pilgrim," supposed by her young
commander to be making good headway due east, was in reality, under the
brisk north-west breeze, speeding along towards the south-east.




CHAPTER XI.

ROUGH WEATHER.


During the ensuing week nothing particular occurred on board. The
breeze still freshened, and the "Pilgrim" made on the average 160 miles
every twenty-four hours. The speed was as great as could be expected
from a craft of her size.

Dick grew more and more sanguine in his anticipations that it could not
be long before the schooner would cross the track of the mail-packets
plying between the eastern and western hemispheres. He had made up his
mind to hail the first passing vessel, and either to transfer his
passengers, or what perhaps would be better still, to borrow a few
sailors, and, it might be, an officer to work the "Pilgrim" to shore.
He could not help, however, a growing sense of astonishment, when day
after day passed, and yet there was no ship to be signalled. He kept
the most vigourous look-out, but all to no purpose. Three voyages
before had he made to the whale-fisheries, and his experience made him
sure that he ought now to be sighting some English or American vessel
on its way between the Equator and Cape Horn.

Very different, however, was the true position of the "Pilgrim" from
what Dick supposed; not only had the ship been carried far out of her
direct course by currents, the force of which there were no means of
estimating, but from the moment when the compass had been tampered with
by Negoro, the steering itself had put the vessel all astray.

Unconscious of both these elements of disturbance, Dick Sands was
convinced that they were proceeding steadily eastwards, and was
perpetually encouraging Mrs. Weldon and himself by the assurance that
they must very soon arrive within view of the American coast; again and
again asserting that his sole concern was for his passengers, and that
for his own safety he had no anxiety.

"But think, Dick," said the lady, "what a position you would have been
in, if you had not had your passengers. You would have been alone with
that terrible Negoro; you would have been rather alarmed then."

"I should have taken good care to put it out of Negoro's power to do me
any mischief, and then I should have worked the ship by myself,"
answered the lad stoutly.

His very pluck gave Mrs. Weldon renewed confidence. She was a woman
with wonderful powers of endurance, and it was only when she thought of
her little son that she had any feeling of despair; yet even this she
endeavoured to conceal, and Dick's undaunted courage helped her.

Although the youth of the apprentice did not allow him to pretend to
any advanced scientific knowledge, he had the proverbial "weather-eye"
of the sailor. He was not only very keen in noticing any change in the
aspect of the sky, but he had learnt from Captain Hull, who was a
clever meteorologist, to draw correct conclusions from the indications
of the barometer; the captain, indeed, having taken the trouble to make
him learn by heart the general rules which are laid down in
Vorepierre's _Dictionnaire Illustré_.

There are seven of these rules:--

1. If after a long period of fine weather the barometer falls suddenly
and continuously, although the mercury may be descending for two or
three days before there is an apparent change in the atmosphere, there
will ultimately be rain; and the longer has been the time between the
first depression and the commencement of the rain, the longer the rain
may be expected to last.

2. _Vice versâ_, if after a long period of wet weather the barometer
begins to rise slowly and steadily, fine weather will ensue; and the
longer the time between the first rising of the mercury and the
commencement of the fine weather, the longer the fine weather may be
expected to last.

3. If immediately after the fall or rise of the mercury a change of
weather ensues, the change will be of no long continuance.[1]

4. A gradual rise for two or three days during rain forecasts fine
weather; but if there be a fall immediately on the arrival of the fine
weather, it will not be for long. This rule holds also conversely.

5. In spring and autumn a sudden fall indicates rain; in the summer, if
very hot, it foretells a storm. In the winter, after a period of steady
frost, a fall prognosticates a change of wind with rain and hail;
whilst a rise announces the approach of snow.

6. Rapid oscillations of the mercury either way are not to be
interpreted as indicating either wet or dry weather of any duration;
continuance of either fair or foul weather is forecast only by a
prolonged and steady rise or fall beforehand.

7. At the end of autumn, after a period of wind and rain, a rise may be
expected to be followed by north wind and frost.

Not merely had Dick got these rules by rote, but he had tested them by
his own observations, and had become singularly trustworthy in his
forecasts of the weather. He made a point of consulting the barometer
several times every day, and although to all appearances the sky
indicated that the fine weather was settled, it did not escape his
observation that on the 20th the mercury showed a tendency to fall.
Dick knew that rain, if it came, would be accompanied by wind; an
opinion in which he was very soon confirmed by the breeze freshening,
till the air was displaced at the rate of nearly sixty feet a second,
or more[1] than forty miles an hour; and he recognized the necessity of
at once shortening sail. He had already used the precaution to take in
the royal, the main-top-sail, and the flying jib, but he now at once
resolved likewise to take in the top-gallant, and to have a couple of
reefs in the foretop-sail.


[Footnote 1: This and several of the other rules are concisely
concentrated in the couplet--

  Long foretold, long last;
  Short notice, soon past.]


To an inexperienced crew, the last operation was far from easy; but
there was no symptom of shrinking from it. Followed by Bat and Austin,
Dick mounted the rigging of the foremast, and with little trouble got
to the top-gallant. Had the weather been less unpromising he would have
been inclined to leave the two yards as they were, but anticipating the
ultimate necessity of being obliged to lower the mast, he unrigged
them, and let them down to the deck; he knew well enough that in the
event of the gale rising as he expected, the lowering of the mast as
well as the shortening of sail would contribute to diminish the strain
and stress upon the vessel.

It was the work of two hours to get this preliminary operation over.
There still remained the task of taking in the reefs in the top-sail.

The "Pilgrim" in one respect differed from most modern vessels. She did
not carry a double foretop, which would very much have diminished the
difficulty attending the reefing. It was consequently necessary to
proceed as before; to mount the rigging, by main force to haul in the
flapping canvas, and to make the fastening secure. But critical and
dangerous as the task was, it was successfully accomplished, and the
three young men, having descended safely to the deck, had the
satisfaction of seeing the schooner run easily before the wind, which
had further increased till it was blowing a stiff gale.

For three days the gale continued brisk and hard, yet without any
variation in its direction. But all along the barometer was falling;
the mercury sank to 28° without symptom of recovery. The sky was
becoming overcast; clouds, thick and lowering, obscured the sun, and it
was difficult to make out where it rose or where it set. Dick did his
best to keep up his courage, but he could not disguise from himself
that there was cause for uneasiness. He took no more rest than was
absolutely necessary, and what repose he allowed himself he always took
on deck; he maintained a calm exterior, but he was really tortured with
anxiety.

[Illustration: For half an hour Negoro stood motionless.]

Although the violence of the wind seemed to lull awhile, Dick did not
suffer himself to be betrayed into any false security; he knew only too
well what to expect, and after a brief interval of comparative quiet,
the gale returned and the waves began to run very high.

About four o'clock one afternoon, Negoro (a most unusual thing for him)
emerged from his kitchen, and skulked to the fore. Dingo was fast
asleep, and did not make his ordinary growl by way of greeting to his
enemy. For half an hour Negoro stood motionless, apparently surveying
the horizon. The heavy waves rolled past; they were higher than the
condition of the wind warranted; their magnitude witnessed to a storm
passing in the west, and there was every reason to suspect that the
"Pilgrim" might be caught by its violence.

Negoro looked long at the water; he then raised his eyes and scanned
the sky. Above and below he might have read threatening signs. The
upper stratum of cloud was travelling far more rapidly than that
beneath, an indication that ere long the masses of vapour would
descend, and, coming in contact with the inferior current, would change
the gale into a tempest, which probably would increase to a hurricane.

It might be from ignorance or it might be from indifference, but there
was no indication of alarm on the face of Negoro; on the other hand
there might be seen a sort of smile curling on his lip. After thus
gazing above him and around him, he clambered on to the bowsprit, and
made his way by degrees to the very gammonings; again he rested and
looked about him as if to explore the horizon; after a while he
clambered back on deck, and soon stealthily retreated to his own
quarters.

No doubt there was much to cause concern in the general aspect of the
weather; but there was one point on which they never failed to
congratulate each other;--that the direction of the wind had never
changed, and consequently must be carrying them in the desired course.
Unless a storm should overtake them, they could continue their present
navigation without peril, and with every prospect of finding a port
upon the shore where they might put in. Such were their mutual and
acknowledged hopes; but Dick secretly felt the misgiving lest, without
a pilot, he might in his ignorance fail to find a harbour of refuge.
Nevertheless, he would not suffer himself to meet trouble half-way, and
kept up his spirits under the conviction that if difficulties came he
should be strengthened to grapple with them or make his escape.

Time passed on, and the 9th of March arrived without material change in
the condition of the atmosphere. The sky remained heavily burdened, and
the wind, which occasionally had abated for a few hours, had always
returned with at least its former violence. The occasional rising of
the mercury never encouraged Dick to anticipate a permanent improvement
in the weather, and he discerned only too plainly that brighter times
at present were not to be looked for.

A startling alarm had more than once been caused by the sudden breaking
of storms in which thunderbolts had seemed to fall within a few cables'
lengths of the schooner. On these occasions the torrents of rain had
been so heavy that the ship had appeared to be in the very midst of a
whirlpool of vapour, and it was impossible to see a yard ahead.

The "Pilgrim" pitched and rolled frightfully. Fortunately Mrs. Weldon
could bear the motion without much personal inconvenience, and
consequently was able to devote her attention to her little boy, who
was a miserable sufferer. Cousin Benedict was as undisturbed as the
cockroaches he was investigating; he hardly noticed the increasing
madness of either wind or wave, but went on with his studies as calmly
as if he were in his own comfortable museum at San Francisco. Moreover,
it was fortunate that the negroes did not suffer to any great degree
from sea-sickness, and consequently were able to assist their captain
in his arduous task, Dick was far too experienced a sailor himself to
be inconvenienced by any oscillations of the vessel, however violent.

The "Pilgrim" still made good headway, and Dick, although he was aware
that ultimately it would probably be necessary again to shorten sail,
was anxious to postpone making any alteration before he was absolutely
obliged. Surely, he reasoned with himself, the land could not now be
far away; he had calculated his speed; he had kept a diligent reckoning
on the chart; surely, the shore must be almost in sight. He would not
trust his crew to keep watch; he was aware how easily their
inexperienced eyes would be misled, and how they might mistake a
distant cloud-bank for the land they coveted to see; he kept watch for
himself; his own gaze was ever fixed upon the horizon; and in the
eagerness of his expectation he would repeatedly mount to the
cross-trees to get a wider range of vision.

But land was not to be seen.

Next day as Dick was standing at the bow, alternately considering the
canvas which his ship carried and the aspect presented by the sky, Mrs.
Weldon approached him without his noticing her. She caught some
muttered expressions of bewilderment that fell from his lips, and asked
him whether he could see anything.

He lowered the telescope which he had been holding in his hand, and
answered,--

"No, Mrs. Weldon, I cannot see anything; and it is this Hiat perplexes
me so sorely. I cannot understand why we have not already come in sight
of land. It is nearly a month since we lost our poor dear captain.
There has been no delay in our progress; no stoppage in our rate of
speed. I cannot make it out."

"How far were we from land when we lost the captain?"

"I am sure I am not far out in saying that we were scarcely more than
4500 miles from the shores of America."

"And at what rate have we been sailing?"

"Not much less than nine score knots a day."

"How long, then, do you reckon, Dick, we ought to be in arriving at the
coast?"

"Under six-and-twenty days," replied Dick.

He paused before he spoke again, then added,--

"But what mystifies me even more than our failing to sight the land is
this: we have not come across a single vessel; and yet vessels without
number are always traversing these seas."

"But do you not think," inquired Mrs. Weldon, "that you have made some
error in your reckoning? Is your speed really what you have supposed?"

"Impossible, madam," replied Dick, with an air of dignity, "impossible
that I should have fallen into error. The log has been consulted,
without fail, every half-hour. I am about to have it lowered now, and I
will undertake to show you that we are at this present moment making
ten miles an hour, which would give considerably over 200 miles a day."

He then called out to Tom,--

"Tom, lower the log!"

The old man was quite accustomed to the duty. The log was fastened to
the line and thrown overboard. It ran out regularly for about
five-and-twenty fathoms, when all at once the line slackened in Tom's
hand.

"It is broken!" cried Tom; "the cord is broken!"

"Broken?" exclaimed Dick: "good heavens! we have lost the log!"

It was too true. The log was gone.

Tom drew in the rope. Dick took it up and examined it. It had not
broken at its point of union with the log; it had given way in the
middle, at a place where the strands in some unaccountable way had worn
strangely thin.

Dick's agony of mind, in spite of his effort to be calm, was intensely
great. A suspicion of foul play involuntarily occurred to him. He knew
that the rope had been of first-rate make; he knew that it had been
quite sound when used before; but he could prove nothing; he could only
mourn over the loss which committed him to the sole remaining compass
as his only guide.

That compass, too, although he knew it not, was misleading him entirely!

Mrs. Weldon sighed as she witnessed the grief which the loss manifestly
caused poor Dick, but in purest sympathy she said nothing, and retired
thoughtfully to her cabin.

It was no longer possible to reckon the rate of progress, but there was
no doubt that the "Pilgrim" continued to maintain at least her previous
speed.

Before another four-and-twenty hours had passed the barometer had
fallen still lower, and the wind was threatening to rise to a velocity
of sixty miles. Resolved to be on the safe side, Dick determined not
only to strike the top-gallant and the main-top-mast, but to take in
all the lower sails. Indeed, he began to be aware that no time was to
be lost. The operation would not be done in a moment, and the storm was
approaching. Dick made Tom take the helm; he ascended the shrouds with
Bat, Austin, and Actæon, making Hercules stay on deck to slacken the
halyards as required.

By dint of arduous exertion, and at no little risk of being thrown
overboard by the rolling of the ship, they succeeded in lowering the
two masts; the fore-top-sail was then reefed, and the fore-sail
entirely struck, so that the only canvas that the schooner carried was
the reefed fore-top and the one stay. These, however, made her run with
a terrific speed.

Early on the morning of the 12th, Dick noted with alarm that the
barometer had not ceased to fall, and now registered only 27.9°. The
tempest had continued to increase, till it was unsafe for the ship to
carry any canvas at all. The order was given for the top-sail to be
taken in, but it was too late; a violent gust carried the sail
completely away, and Austin, who had made his way to the fore-top-yard,
was struck by the flying sheet; and although he was not seriously hurt,
he was obliged at once to return to deck.

Dick Sands became more uneasy than ever; he was tortured by
apprehensions of reefs outlying the shore, to which he imagined he must
now be close; but he could discern no rocks to justify his fears, and
returned to take his place at the helm.

The next moment Negoro appeared on deck; he pointed mysteriously to the
far-off horizon, as though he discerned some object, as a mountain,
there; and looking round with a malevolent smile, immediately left the
deck, and went back to his cabin.

[Illustration: Under bare poles]




CHAPTER XII.

HOPE REVIVED.


The wind had now increased to a hurricane; it had veered to the
south-west, and had attained a velocity little short of ninety miles an
hour. On land, the most substantial of erections could with difficulty
have withstood its violence, and a vessel anchored in a roadstead must
have been torn from its moorings and cast ashore. The memorable storm
that had devastated the Island of Guadaloupe on the 25th of July, 1825,
when heavy cannon were lifted from their carriages, could scarcely have
been more furious, and it was only her mobility before the blast and
the solidity of her structure that gave the "Pilgrim" a hope of
surviving the tempest.

A few minutes after the topsail had been lost, the small jib was
carried away. Dick Sands contemplated the possibility of throwing out a
storm-jib, made of extra strong canvas, as a means of bringing the ship
a little more under his control, but abandoned the idea as useless. It
was, therefore, under bare poles that the "Pilgrim" was driven along;
but in spite of the lack of canvas, the hull, masts, and rigging, gave
sufficient purchase to the wind, and the progress of the schooner was
prodigiously rapid; sometimes, indeed, she seemed to be literally
lifted from the water, and scudded on, scarcely skimming its surface.
The rolling was fearful. Enormous waves followed in quick succession,
and as they travelled faster than the ship, there was the perpetual
risk of one of them catching her astern. Without sail, there were no
means of escaping that peril by increase of speed; the adroit
management of the helm was the only chance of avoiding the hazardous
shocks, and even this repeatedly failed.

To prevent his being washed overboard Dick lashed himself to his place
at the wheel by a rope round his waist, and made Tom and Bat keep close
at hand, ready to give him assistance, in case of emergency. Hercules
and Actæon, clinging to the bitt, kept watch at the bow. Mrs. Weldon
and her party, at Dick's special request, remained inside the stern
cabin, although the lady, for her own part, would much rather have
stayed on deck; she had, however, yielded to the representation that
she would thus be exposing herself to unnecessary danger.

The hatchways were hermetically closed, and it was to be hoped that
they would withstand the heavy sea that was dashing over them; only let
one of them give way to the pressure, and the vessel must inevitably
fill and founder. It was a matter of congratulation that the stowage
had been done very carefully, so that notwithstanding all the lurchings
of the ship, the cargo did not shift in the least.

The heroic young commander had still further curtailed his periods of
rest, and it was only at the urgent entreaty of Mrs. Weldon, who feared
that he would exhaust himself by his vigilance, that he was induced to
lie down for a few hours' sleep on the night of the 13th.

After Tom and Bat had been left alone at the wheel they were, somewhat
to their surprise, joined by Negoro, who very rarely came aft. He
seemed inclined to enter into conversation, but found little
encouragement to talk on the part either of Tom or his son. All at once
a violent roll of the ship threw him off his feet, and he would have
gone overboard if he had not been saved by falling against the binnacle.

Old Tom was in a frantic state of alarm lest the compass should be
broken. He uttered a cry of consternation so loud that it roused Dick
from the light slumber into which he had fallen in the cabin, and he
rushed to the deck. By the time he had reached the stern, Negoro had
not only regained his feet, but had managed successfully to conceal the
bit of iron which he had again extracted from beneath the binnacle
where he had himself laid it. Now that the wind had shifted to the
south-west, it suited his machinations that the magnetic needle should
indicate its true direction.

[Illustration: Quick as lightning, Dick Sands drew a revolver from his
pocket.]

"How now?" asked Dick eagerly; "what is the meaning of all this noise?"

Tom explained how the cook had fallen against the binnacle, and how he
had been terrified lest the compass should be injured. Dick's heart
sank at the thought of losing his sole remaining compass, and his
anxiety betrayed itself in his countenance as he knelt down to examine
its condition; but he breathed freely as he ascertained that the
instrument had sustained no damage; by the dim light he saw the needle
resting on its two concentric circles, and felt his fears at once
relieved; of course, he was quite unconscious of the fact that the
removal of the bit of iron had made the magnet change its pointing. The
incident, however, excited his misgiving; although he felt that Negoro
could not be held responsible for an accidental fall, the very presence
of the man in such a place at such a time perplexed him.

"And what brings you here, this hour of the night?" he asked.

"That's not your business," retorted Negoro insolently.

"It is my business," replied Dick resolutely; "and I mean to have an
answer; what brought you here?"

Negoro answered sullenly that he knew of no rule to prevent his going
where he liked and when he liked.

"No rule!" cried Dick; "then I make the rule now. From this time
forward, I make the rule that you shall never come astern. Do you
understand?"

Roused from his accustomed doggedness, the man seemed to make a
threatening movement. Quick as lightning, Dick Sands drew a revolver
from his pocket.

"Negoro, one act, one word of insubordination, and I blow out your
brains!"

Negoro had no time to reply; before he could speak he was bowed down
towards the deck by an irresistible weight. Hercules had grasped him by
the shoulder.

"Shall I put him overboard, captain? he will make a meal for the
fishes; they are not very particular what they eat," said the negro,
with a grin of contempt.

"Not yet," quietly answered Dick.

The giant removed his hand, and Negoro stood upright again, and began
to retreat to his own quarters, muttering, however, as he passed
Hercules,--

"You cursed nigger! You shall pay for this!"

The discovery was now made that the wind apparently had taken a sudden
shift of no less than forty-five degrees; but what occasioned Dick the
greatest perplexity was that there was nothing in the condition of the
sea to correspond with the alteration in the current of the air;
instead of being directly astern, wind and waves were now beating on
the larboard. Progress in this way must necessarily be full of danger,
and Dick was obliged to bring his ship up at least four points before
he got her straight before the tempest.

The young captain felt that he must be more than ever on the alert; he
could not shake off the suspicion that Negoro had been concerned in the
loss of the first compass, and had some further designs upon the
second. Still he was utterly at a loss to imagine what possible motive
the man could have for so criminal an act of malevolence, as there was
no plausible reason to be assigned why he should not be as anxious as
all the rest to reach the coast of America. The suspicion continued,
however, to haunt him, and when he mentioned it to Mrs. Weldon he found
that a similar feeling of distrust had agitated her, although she, like
himself, was altogether unable to allege a likely motive why the cook
should contemplate so strange an act of mischief. It was determined
that a strict surveillance should be kept upon all the fellow's
movements.

Negoro, however, manifested no inclination to disobey the captain's
peremptory order; he kept strictly to his own part of the ship; but as
Dingo was now regularly quartered on the stern, there was a tolerably
sure guarantee that the cook would not be found wandering much in that
direction.

A week passed, and still the tempest showed no signs of abating; the
barometer continued to fall, and not once did a period of calmer
weather afford an opportunity of carrying sail. The "Pilgrim" still
made her way northeast. Her speed could not be less than two hundred
miles in twenty-four hours. But no land appeared. Vast as was the range
of the American continent, extending for 120 degrees between the
Atlantic and the Pacific, it was nowhere to be discerned. Was he
dreaming? was he mad? Dick would perpetually ask himself: had he been
sailing in a wrong direction? had he failed to steer aright?

But no: he was convinced there was no error in his steering. Although
he could not actually see it for the mist, he knew that day after day
the sun rose before him, and that it set behind him. Yet he was
constrained in bewilderment to ask, what had become of those shores of
America upon which, when they came in sight, there was only too great a
fear the ship should be dashed? what had become of them? where were
they? whither had this incessant hurricane driven them? why did not the
expected coast appear?

To all these bewildering inquiries Dick could find no answer except to
imagine that his compass had misled him. Yet he was powerless to put
his own misgivings to the test; he deplored more than ever the
destruction of the duplicate instrument which would have checked his
registers. He studied his chart; but all in vain; the position in which
he found himself as the result of Negoro's treachery, seemed to baffle
him the more, the more he tried to solve the mystery.

The days were passing on in this chronic state of anxiety, when one
morning about eight o'clock, Hercules, who was on watch at the fore,
suddenly shouted,--

"Land!"

Dick Sands had little reliance upon the negro's inexperienced eye, but
hurried forward to the bow.

"Where's the land?" he cried; his voice being scarcely audible above
the howling of the tempest.

"There! look there!" said Hercules, nodding his head and pointing over
the larboard side, to the north-east.

Dick could see nothing.

Mrs. Weldon had heard the shout. Unable to restrain her interest, she
had left her cabin and was at Dick's side. He uttered an expression of
surprise at seeing her, but could not hear anything she said, as her
voice was unable to rise above the roaring of the elements; she stood,
her whole being as it were concentrated in the power of vision, and
scanned the horizon in the direction indicated by Hercules. But all to
no purpose.

Suddenly, however, after a while, Dick raised his hand.

"Yes!" he said; "yes; sure enough, yonder is land."

He clung with excitement to the netting; and Mrs Weldon, supported by
Hercules, strained her eyes yet more vehemently to get a glimpse of a
shore which she had begun to despair of ever reaching.

Beyond a doubt an elevated peak was there. It must be about ten miles
to leeward. A break in the clouds soon left it more distinct. Some
promontory it must be upon the American coast. Without sails, of
course, the "Pilgrim" had no chance of bearing down direct upon it; but
at least there was every reason to believe that she would soon reach
some other portion of the shore; perhaps before noon, certainly in a
few hours, they must be close to land.

The pitching of the ship made it impossible for Mrs. Weldon to keep
safe footing on the deck; accordingly, at a sign from Dick, Hercules
led her back again to her cabin.

Dick did not remain long at the bow, but went thoughtfully back to the
wheel.

He had, indeed, a tremendous responsibility before him. Here was the
land, the land for which they had longed so eagerly; and now that their
anticipations were on the point of being realized, what was there, with
a hurricane driving them on towards it, to prevent that land being
their destruction? What measures could he take to prevent the schooner
being dashed to pieces against it?

[Illustration: "There! look there!"]

At the very moment when the promontory was just abreast of them, Negoro
appeared on deck; he nodded to the peak familiarly, as he might have
saluted a familiar friend, and retired as stealthily as he had come.

Two hours later, and the promontory was lying to the larboard wake.
Dick Sands had never relaxed his watchfulness, but he had failed to
discover any further indications of a coast-line. His perplexity could
only increase; the horizon was clear; the Andes ought to be distinct;
they would be conspicuous twenty miles or more away. Dick took up his
telescope again and again; he scrutinized the eastern horizon with
minutest care; but there was nothing to be seen; and as the afternoon
waned away the last glimpse had been taken of the promontory that had
awakened their expectation; it had vanished utterly from their gaze; no
indication of shore could be seen from the "Pilgrim's" deck.

Dick Sands uttered a sigh of mingled amazement and relief. He went into
Mrs. Weldon's cabin, where she was standing with her party.

"It was only an island!" he said; "only an island!"

"How? why? what island? what do you mean?" cried Mrs. Weldon
incredulously; "what island can it be?"

"The chart perhaps will tell us," replied Dick; and hurrying off to his
own cabin, he immediately returned with the chart in his hands.

After studying it attentively for a few minutes, he said,--

"There, Mrs. Weldon; the land we have just passed, I should suppose
must be that little speck in the midst of the Pacific. It must be
Easter Island. At least, there seems to be no other land which possibly
it could be."

"And do you say," inquired Mrs. Weldon, "that we have left it quite
behind us?"

"Yes, entirely; almost to windward."

Mrs. Weldon commenced a searching scrutiny of the map that was
outspread before her.

"How far is this," she said, after bending a considerable time over the
chart; "how far is this from the coast of America?"

"Thirty-five degrees," answered Dick; "somewhere about 2500 miles."

"What ever do you mean?" rejoined the lady astonished; "if the
'Pilgrim' is still 2500 miles from shore, she has positively made no
progress at all. Impossible!"

In thoughtful perplexity, Dick passed his hand across his brow. He did
not know what to say. After an interval of silence, he said,--

"I have no account to give for the strange delay. It is inexplicable to
myself, except upon that one hypothesis, which I cannot resist, that
the readings of the compass, somehow or other, have been wrong."

He relapsed into silence. Then, brightening up, he added,--

"But, thank God! at least we have now the satisfaction of knowing where
we really are; we are no longer lost upon the wide Pacific; if only
this hurricane will cease, long as the distance seems, we are on our
proper course to the shores of America."

The tone of confidence with which the youthful captain spoke had the
effect of inspiring new hope into all who heard him; their spirits
rose, and to their sanguine mood it seemed as if they were approaching
to the end of all their troubles, and had hardly more to do than to
await the turning of a tide to bring them into a glad proximity to port.

Easter Island, of which the true name is Vai-Hoo, was discovered by
David in 1686 and visited by Cook and Lapérouse. It lies in lat. 27°
S., and long. 112 E.; consequently, it was evident that during the
raging of the hurricane the schooner had been driven northwards no less
than fifteen degrees. Far away, however, as she was from shore, the
wind could hardly fail within ten days to carry her within sight of
land; and then, if the storm had worn itself out, (as probably it
would,) the "Pilgrim" would again hoist sail, and make her way into
some port with safety. Anyhow, the discovery of his true position
restored a spirit of confidence to Dick Sands, and he anticipated the
time when he should no longer be drifting helplessly before the storm.

To say the truth, the "Pilgrim" had suffered very little from the
prolonged fury of the weather. The damage she had sustained was limited
to the loss of the topsail and the small jib, which could be easily
replaced. The caulking of the seams remained thoroughly sound, and no
drop of water had found its way into the hold. The pumps, too, were
perfectly free. Dick Sands did not fear for the stability of his ship;
his only anxiety was lest the weather should not moderate in time. Only
let the wind subside, and the schooner once more would be under his
control; but he never forgot that the ordering of the winds and waves
were in the hands of the Great Disposer of all.




CHAPTER XIII.

LAND AT LAST.


It was not long before Dick's sanguine expectations were partially
realized, for on the very next day, which was the 27th, the barometer
began to rise, not rapidly, but steadily, indicating that its elevation
would probably continue. The sea remained exceedingly rough, but the
violence of the wind, which had veered slightly towards the west, had
perceptibly diminished. The tempest had passed its greatest fury, and
was beginning to wear itself out.

Not a sail, however, could yet be hoisted; the smallest show of canvas
would have been carried away in an instant; nevertheless Dick hoped
that before another twenty-four hours were over, the "Pilgrim" might be
able to carry a storm-jib.

In the course of the night the wind moderated still more and the
pitching of the ship had so far diminished that the passengers began to
reappear on deck. Mrs. Weldon was the first to leave her enforced
imprisonment. She was anxious to speak to Dick, whom she might have
expected to find looking pale and wan after his almost superhuman
exertions and loss of sleep. But she was mistaken; however much the lad
might suffer from the strain in after-years, at present he exhibited no
symptoms of failing energy.

"Well, Captain Dick, how are you?" she said, as she advanced towards
him holding out her hand.

Dick smiled.

"You call me captain, Mrs. Weldon," he answered, "but you do not seem
disposed to submit implicitly to captain's orders. Did I not direct you
to keep to your cabin?"

[Illustration: "You have acquitted yourself like a man."]

"You did," replied the lady; "but observing how much the storm had
abated, I could not resist the temptation to disobey you."

"Yes, madam, the weather is far more promising; the barometer has not
fallen since yesterday morning, and I really trust the worst is over
now."

"Thank Heaven!" she replied, and after a few moments' silence, she
added.--

"But now, Dick, you must really take some rest; you may perhaps not
know how much you require it; but it is absolutely necessary."

"Rest!" the boy repeated; "rest! I want no rest. I have only done my
duty, and it will be time enough for me to concern myself about my own
rest, when I have seen my passengers in a place of safety."

"You have acquitted yourself like a man," said Mrs. Weldon; "and you
may be assured that my husband, like myself, will never forget the
services you have rendered me. I shall urge upon him the request which
I am sure he will not refuse, that you shall have your studies
completed, so that you may be made a captain for the firm."

Tears of gratitude rose to Dick's eyes. He deprecated the praise that
was lavished upon him, but rejoiced in the prospect that seemed opening
upon his future. Mrs. Weldon assured him that he was dear as a son to
her, and pressed a gentle kiss upon his forehead. The lad felt that he
was animated, if need be, to yet greater hardships in behalf of his
benefactors, and resolved to prove himself even more worthy of their
confidence.

By the 29th, the wind had so far moderated that Dick thought he might
increase the "Pilgrim's" speed by hoisting the foresail and topsail.

"Now, my men, I have some work for you to-day," he said to the negroes
when he came on deck at daybreak.

"All right, captain," answered Hercules, "we are growing rusty for want
of something to do."

"Why didn't you blow with your big mouth?" said little Jack; "you could
have beaten the wind all to nothing."

Dick laughed, and said, "Not a bad idea, Jack; if ever we get becalmed,
we must get Hercules to blow into the sails."

"I shall be most happy," retorted the giant, and he inflated his huge
checks till he was the very impersonation of Boreas himself.

"But now to work!" cried Dick; "we have lost our topsail, and we must
contrive to hoist another. Not an easy matter, I can tell you."

"I dare say we shall manage it," replied Actæon.

"We must do our best," said Tom.

"Can't I help?" inquired Jack.

"Of course you can," answered Dick; "run along to the wheel, and assist
Bat."

Jack strutted off, proud enough of his commission.

Under Dick's directions, the negroes commenced their somewhat difficult
task. The new topsail, rolled up, had first of all to be hoisted, and
then to be made fast to the yard; but so adroitly did the crew carry
out their orders, that in less than an hour the sail was properly set
and flying with a couple of reefs. The foresail and second jib, which
had been taken down before the tempest, were hoisted again, and before
ten o'clock the "Pilgrim" was running along under the three sails which
Dick considered were as much as it was prudent to carry. Even at her
present speed, the schooner, he reckoned, would be within sight of the
American shore in about ten days. It was an immense relief to him to
find that she was no longer at the mercy of the waves, and when he saw
the sails properly set he returned in good spirits to his post at the
helm, not forgetting to thank the temporary helmsman for his services,
nor omitting his acknowledgment to Master Jack, who received the
compliment with becoming gravity.

Although the clouds continued to travel all the next day with great
rapidity they were very much broken, and alternately the "Pilgrim" was
bathed in sunlight and enveloped in vapours, which rolled on towards
the east. As the weather cleared, the hatchways were opened in order to
ventilate the ship, and the outer air was allowed again to penetrate
not only the hold, but the cabin and crew's quarters The wet sails were
hung out to dry, the deck was washed down, for Dick Sands was anxious
not to bring his ship into port without having "finished her toilet,"
and he found that his crew could very well spare a few hours daily to
get her into proper trim.

[Illustration: They both examined the outspread chart.]

Notwithstanding the loss of the log, Dick had sufficient experience to
be able to make an approximate estimate of the schooner's progress, and
after having pointed out to Mrs. Weldon what he imagined was the
"Pilgrim's" true position, he told her that it was his firm impression
that land would be sighted in little more than a week.

"And upon what part of South America do you reckon we are likely to
find ourselves?" she asked.

"That is more than I dare venture to promise," replied Dick; "but I
should think somewhere hereabouts."

He was pointing on the chart to the long shore-line of Chili and Peru.

They both examined the outspread chart with still closer attention.

"Here, you see," resumed Dick, "here is the island we have just left;
we left it in the west; the wind has not shifted; we must expect to
come in sight of land, pretty nearly due east of it. The coast has
plenty of harbours. From any one of them you will be able easily to get
to San Francisco. You know, I dare say, that the Pacific Navigation
Company's steamers touch at all the principal ports. From any of them
you will be sure to get direct passage to California."

"But do you mean," asked Mrs. Weldon, "that you are not going yourself
to take the schooner to San Francisco?"

"Not direct," replied the young captain; "I want to see you safe on
shore and satisfactorily on your homeward way. When that is done, I
shall hope to get competent officers to take the ship to Valparaiso,
where she will discharge her cargo, as Captain Hull intended; and
afterwards I shall work our way back to San Francisco."

"Ah, well; we will see all about that in due time." Mrs. Weldon said,
smiling; and, after a short pause, added, "At one time, Dick, you
seemed to have rather a dread of the shore."

"Quite true," answered Dick; "but now I am in hopes we may fall in with
some passing vessel; we want to have a confirmation as to our true
position. I cannot tell you how surprised I am that we have not come
across a single vessel. But when we near the land we shall be able to
get a pilot."

"But what will happen if we fail to get a pilot?" was Mrs. Weldon's
inquiry. She was anxious to learn how far the lad was prepared to meet
any emergency.

With unhesitating promptness Dick replied,--

"Why, then, unless the weather takes the control of the ship out of my
hands, I must patiently follow the coast until I come to a harbour of
refuge. But if the wind should freshen, I should have to adopt other
measures."

"What then, Dick, what then?" persisted Mrs. Weldon.

The boy's brow knitted itself together in resolution, and he said
deliberately,--

"I should run the ship aground."

Mrs. Weldon started.

"However," Dick continued, "there is no reason to apprehend this. The
weather has mended and is likely to mend. And why should we fear about
finding a pilot? Let us hope all will be well."

Mrs. Weldon at least had satisfied herself on one point. She had
ascertained that although Dick did not anticipate disaster, yet he was
prepared in the case of emergency to resort to measures from which any
but the most experienced seaman would shrink.

But although Dick's equanimity had been successful in allaying any
misgivings on Mrs. Weldon's part, it must be owned that the condition
of the atmosphere caused him very serious uneasiness.

The wind remained uncomfortably high, and the barometer gave very
ominous indications that it would ere long freshen still more. Dick
dreaded that the time was about to return in which once again he must
reduce his vessel to a state of bare poles; but so intense was his
aversion to having his ship so wrested as it were from his own
management, that he determined to carry the topsail till it was all but
carried away by the force of the blast. Concerned, moreover, for the
safety of his masts, the loss of which he acknowledged must be fatal,
he had the shrouds well overhauled and the backstays considerably
tightened.

More than once another contingency occurred to his mind, and gave him
some anxiety. He could not overlook the possibility of the wind
changing all round. What should he do in such a case? He would of
course endeavour by all means to get the schooner on by incessant
tacking; but was there not the certainty of a most hazardous delay? and
worse than this, was there not a likelihood of the "Pilgrim" being once
again driven far out to sea?

Happily these forebodings were not realized. The wind, after chopping
about for several days, at one time blowing from the north, and at
another from the south, finally settled down into a stiffish gale from
the west, which did nothing worse than severely strain the masts.

In this weary but hopeful endurance time passed on. The 5th of April
had arrived. It was more than two months since the "Pilgrim" had
quitted New Zealand; it was true that during the first three weeks of
her voyage she had been impeded by protracted calms and contrary winds;
but since that time her speed had been rapid, the very tempests had
driven her forwards with unwonted velocity; she had never failed to
have her bow towards the land, and yet land seemed as remote as ever;
the coast line was retreating as they approached it. What could be the
solution of the mystery?

From the cross-trees one or other of the negroes was kept incessantly
on the watch. Dick Sands himself, telescope in hand, would repeatedly
ascend in the hope of beholding some lofty peak of the Andes emerging
from the mists that hung over the horizon. But all in vain.

False alarms were given more than once. Sometimes Tom, sometimes
Hercules, or one of the others would be sure that a distant speck they
had descried was assuredly a mountain ridge; but the vapours were
continually gathering in such fantastic forms that their unexperienced
eyes were soon deceived, and they seldom had to wait long before their
fond delusion was all dispelled.

At last, the expected longing was fulfilled. At eight o'clock one
morning the mists seemed broken up with unusual rapidity, and the
horizon was singularly clear. Dick had hardly gone aloft when his voice
rung out,--

"Land! Land ahead!"

As if summoned by a spell, every one was on deck in an instant: Mrs.
Weldon, sanguine of a speedy end to the general anxiety; little Jack,
gratified at a new object of curiosity; Cousin Benedict, already
scenting a new field for entomological investigation; old Nan; and the
negroes, eager to set foot upon American soil; all, with the exception
of Negoro, all were on deck; but the cook did not stir from his
solitude, or betray any sympathy with the general excitement.

Whatever hesitation there might be at first soon passed away; one after
another soon distinguished the shore they were approaching, and in half
an hour there was no room for the most sceptical to doubt that Dick was
right. There was land not far ahead.

A few miles to the east there was a long low-lying coast; the chain of
the Andes ought to be visible; but it was obscured, of course, by the
intervening clouds.

The "Pilgrim" bore down rapidly towards the land, and in a short time
its configuration could be plainly made out. Towards the north-east the
coast terminated in a headland of moderate height sheltering a kind of
roadstead; on the south-east it stretched out in a long and narrow
tongue. The Andes were still wanting to the scene; they must be
somewhere in the background; but at present, strange to say, there was
only a succession of low cliffs with some trees standing out against
the sky. No human habitation, no harbour, not even an indication of a
river-mouth, could anywhere be seen.

The wind remained brisk, and the schooner was driving directly towards
the land, with sails shortened as seemed desirable; but Dick realized
to himself the fact that he was utterly incapable of altering her
course. With eager eyes he scrutinized his situation. Straight ahead
was a reef over which the waves were curling, and around which the surf
must be tremendous. It could hardly be more than a mile away. The wind
seemed brisker than before.

After gazing awhile, Dick seemed to have come to a sudden resolution.
He went quickly aft and took the helm. He had seen a little cove, and
had made up his mind that he would try and make his way into it. He did
not speak a word; he knew the difficulty of the task he had undertaken;
he was aware from the white foam, that there was shallow water on
either hand; but he kept the secret of the peril to himself, and sought
no counsel in coming to his fixed resolve.

Dingo had been trotting up and down the deck. All at once he bounded to
the fore, and broke out into a piteous howl. It roused Dick from his
anxious cogitations. Was it possible that the animal recognized the
coast? It almost seemed as if it brought back some painful associations.

The howling of the dog had manifestly attracted Negoro's attention; the
man emerged from his cabin, and, regardless of the dog, stood close to
the netting; but although he gazed at the surf, it did not seem to
occasion him any alarm. Mrs. Weldon, who was watching him, fancied she
saw a flush rise to his face, which involuntarily suggested the thought
to her mind that Negoro had seen the place before.

Either she had no time or no wish to express what had struck her, for
she did not mention it to Dick, who, at that moment, left the helm, and
came and stood beside her.

Dick looked as if he were taking a lingering farewell of the cove past
which they were being carried beyond his power to help.

In a few moments he turned round to Mrs. Weldon, and said quietly,--

"Mrs. Weldon, I am disappointed. I hoped to get the schooner into
yonder cove; but there is no chance now; if nothing is done, in half an
hour she will be upon that reef. I have but one alternative left. I
must run her aground. It will be utter destruction to the ship, but
there is no choice. Your safety is the first and paramount
consideration."

"Do you mean that there is no other course to be taken, Dick?"

"None whatever," said Dick decidedly.

"It must be as you will," she said.

Forthwith ensued the agitating preparations for stranding. Mrs. Weldon,
Jack, Cousin Benedict, and Nan were provided with life belts, while
Dick and the negroes made themselves ready for being dashed into the
waves. Every precaution that the emergency admitted was duly taken.
Mrs. Weldon was entrusted to the special charge of Hercules; Dick made
himself responsible for doing all he could for little Jack; Cousin
Benedict, who was tolerably calm, was handed over to Bat and Austin;
while Actæon promised to look after Nan. Negoro's nonchalance implied
that he was quite capable of shifting for himself.

Dick had the forethought also to order about a dozen barrels of their
cargo to be brought in front, so that when the "Pilgrim" struck, the
oil escaping and floating on the waves would temporarily lull their
fury, and make smoother water for the passage of the ship.

After satisfying himself that there was no other measure to be taken to
ameliorate the peril, Dick Sands returned to the helm. The schooner was
all but upon the reef, and only a few cables' length from the shore;
her starboard quarter indeed was already bathed in the seething foam,
and any instant the keel might be expected to grate upon the
under-lying rock. Presently a change of colour in the water was
observed; it revealed a passage between the rocks. Dick gave the wheel
a turn; he saw the chance of getting aground nearer to the shore than
he had dared to hope, and he made the most of it. He steered the
schooner right into the narrow channel; the sea was furious, and dashed
vehemently upon the crags on either hand.

[Illustration: The sea was furious, and dashed vehemently upon the
crags on either hand]

"Now, my lads!" he cried to his crew, "now's your time; out with your
oil! let it run!"

Ready for the order, the negroes poured out the oil, and the raging
waters were stilled as if by magic. A few moments more and perchance
they would rage more vehemently than ever. But for the instant they
were lulled.

The "Pilgrim," meanwhile, had glided onwards, and made dead for the
adjacent shore. There was a sudden shock. Caught by an enormous wave
the schooner had been hurled aground; her masts had fallen, fortunately
without injury to any one on board. But the vessel had parted
amidships, and was foundering; the water was rushing irresistibly into
the hold.

The shore, however, was not half a cable's length away; there was a
low, dark ridge of rocks that was united to the beach; it afforded
ample means of rescue, and in less than ten minutes the "Pilgrim's"
captain, crew, and passengers were all landed, with their lives, at the
foot of the overhanging cliff.




CHAPTER XIV.

ASHORE.


Thus, after a voyage of seventy-four days, the "Pilgrim" had stranded.
Mrs. Weldon and her fellow-voyagers joined in thanksgiving to the kind
Providence that had brought them ashore, not upon one of the solitary
islands of Polynesia, but upon a solid continent, from almost any part
of which there would be no difficulty in getting home.

The ship was totally lost. She was lying in the surf a hopeless wreck,
and few must be the hours that would elapse before she would be broken
up in scattered fragments; it was impossible to save her.
Notwithstanding that Dick Sands bewailed the loss of a valuable ship
and her cargo to the owner, he had the satisfaction of knowing that he
had been instrumental in saving what was far more precious, the lives
of the owner's wife and son.

It was impossible to do more than hazard a conjecture as to the part of
the South American coast on which the "Pilgrim" had been cast. Dick
imagined that it must be somewhere on the coast of Peru; after sighting
Easter Island, he knew that the united action of the equatorial current
and the brisk wind must have had the effect of driving the schooner far
northward, and he formed his conclusion accordingly. Be the true
position, however, what it might, it was all important that it should
be accurately ascertained as soon as possible. If it were really in
Peru, he would not be long in finding his way to one of the numerous
ports and villages that lie along the coast.

But the shore here was quite a desert. A narrow strip of beach, strewn
with boulders, was enclosed by a cliff of no great height, in which, at
irregular intervals, deep funnels appeared as chasms in the rock. Here
and there a gentle slope led to the top.

About a quarter of a mile to the north was the mouth of a little river
which had not been visible from the sea. Its banks were overhung by a
number of "rhizophora," a species of mangrove entirely distinct from
that indigenous to India. It was soon ascertained that the summit of
the cliff was clothed by a dense forest, extending far away in
undulations of verdure to the mountains in the background. Had Cousin
Benedict been a botanist, he could not have failed to find a new and
interesting field for his researches; there were lofty baobabs (to
which an extraordinary longevity has often been erroneously ascribed),
with bark resembling Egyptian syenite; there were white pines,
tamarinds, pepper-plants of peculiar species, and numerous other plants
unfamiliar to the eye of a native of the North; but, strange to say,
there was not a single specimen of the extensive family of palms, of
which more than a thousand varieties are scattered in profusion in so
many quarters of the globe.

Above the shore hovered a large number of screeching birds, mostly of
the swallow tribe, their black plumage shot with steelly blue, and
shading off to a light brown at the top of the head. Now and then a few
partridges of a greyish colour rose on wing, their necks entirely bare
of feathers: the fearless manner in which the various birds all allowed
themselves to be approached made Mrs. Weldon and Dick both wonder if
the shores upon which they had been thrown were not so deserted that
the sound of fire-arms was not known.

On the edge of the reefs some pelicans (of the species known as
_pelicanus minor_) were busily filling their pouches with tiny fish,
and some gulls coming in from the open sea began to circle round the
wreck: with these exceptions not a living creature appeared in sight.
Benedict, no doubt, could have discovered many entomological novelties
amongst the foliage, but these could give no more information than the
birds as to the name of their habitat. Neither north, nor south, nor
towards the forest, was there trace of rising smoke, or any footprint
or other sign to indicate the presence of a human being.

Dick's surprise was very great. He knew that the proximity of a native
would have made Dingo bark aloud; but the dog gave no warning; he was
running backwards and forwards, his tail lowered and his nose close to
the ground; now and again he uttered a deep growl.

"Look at Dingo!" said Mrs. Weldon; "how strange he is! he seems to be
trying to discover a lost scent."

After watching the dog for a time, she spoke again:--

"Look, too, at Negoro! he and the dog seem to be on the same purpose!"

"As to Negoro," said Dick, "I cannot concern myself with him now; he
must do as he pleases; I have no further control over him; his service
expires with the loss of the ship."

Negoro was in fact walking to and fro, surveying the shore with the air
of a man who was trying to recall some past experience to his
recollection. His dogged taciturnity was too well known for any one to
think of questioning him; every one was accustomed to let him go his
own way, and when Dick noticed that he had gone towards the little
river, and had disappeared behind the cliff, he thought no more about
him. Dingo likewise had quite forgotten his enemy, and desisted from
his growling.

The first necessity for the shipwrecked party was to find a temporary
shelter where they might take some refreshment. There was no lack of
provisions; independently of the resources of the land, the ebbing tide
had left upon the rocks the great bulk of the "Pilgrim's" stores, and
the negroes had already collected several kegs of biscuit, and a number
of cases of preserved meat, besides a variety of other supplies. All
that they rescued they carefully piled up above high-water mark. As
nothing appeared to be injured by the sea-water, the victualling of the
party all seemed to be satisfactorily secure for the interval which
must elapse (and they all believed it would not be long,) before they
reached one of the villages which they presumed were close at hand.
Dick, moreover, took the precaution of sending Hercules to get a small
supply of fresh water from the river hard by, and the good-natured
fellow returned carrying a whole barrel-full on his shoulder.

[Illustration: Surveying the shore with the air of a man who was trying
to recall some past experience]

Plenty of fuel was lying about, and whenever they wanted to light a
fire they were sure of having an abundance of dead wood and the roots
of the old mangroves. Old Tom, an inveterate smoker, always carried a
tinder box in his pocket; this had been too tightly fastened to be
affected by the moisture, and could always produce a spark upon
occasion.

Still they must have a shelter. Without some rest it was impossible to
start upon a tour of exploration; accordingly, all interests were
directed towards ascertaining where the necessary repose could be
obtained.

The honour of discovering where the desired retreat could be found fell
to the lot of little Jack. Trotting about at the foot of the cliff, he
came upon one of those grottoes which are constantly being found
hollowed out in the rock by the vehement action of the waves in times
of tempest.

"Here, look here!" cried the child; "here's a place!"

"Well done, Jack!" answered his mother; "your lucky discovery is just
what we wanted. If we were going to stay here any time we should have
to do the same as the Swiss Family Robinson, and name the spot after
you!"

It was hardly more than twelve or fourteen feet square, and yet the
grotto seemed to Jack to be a gigantic cavern. But narrow as its limits
were, it was capacious enough to receive the entire party. It was a
great satisfaction to Mrs. Weldon to observe that it was perfectly dry,
and as the moon was just about her first quarter there was no
likelihood of a tide rising to the foot of the cliff. At any rate, it
was resolved that they might take up their quarters there for a few
hours.

Shortly after one o'clock the whole party were seated upon a carpet of
seaweed round a repast consisting of preserved meat, biscuit, and water
flavoured with a few drops of rum, of which Bat had saved a quart
bottle from the wreck. Even Negoro had returned and joined the group;
probably he had not cared to venture alone along the bank of the stream
into the forest. He sat listening, as it seemed indifferently, to the
various plans for the future that were being discussed, and did not
open his mouth either by way of remonstrance or suggestion.

Dingo was not forgotten, and had his share of food duly given him
outside the grotto, where he was keeping guard.

When the meal was ended, Mrs. Weldon, passing her arms round Jack, who
was lounging half asleep with excitement and fatigue at her side, was
the first to speak.

"My dear Dick," she said, "in the name of us all, let me thank you for
the services you have rendered us in our tedious time of difficulty. As
you have been our captain at sea, let me beg you to be our guide upon
land. We shall have perfect confidence in your judgment, and await your
instructions as to what our next proceedings shall be."

All eyes were turned upon Dick. Even Negoro appeared to be roused to
curiosity, as if eager to know what he had to say.

Dick did not speak for some moments. He was manifestly pondering what
step he should advise. After a while he said,--

"My own impression, Mrs. Weldon, is that we have been cast ashore upon
one of the least-frequented parts of the coast of Peru, and that we are
near the borders of the Pampas. In that case I should conclude that we
are at a considerable distance from any village. Now, I should
recommend that we stay here altogether for the coming night. To-morrow
morning, two of us can start off on an exploring expedition. I
entertain but little doubt that natives will be met with within ten or
a dozen miles."

Mrs. Weldon looked doubtful. Plainly she thought unfavourably of the
project of separating the party. She reflected for a considerable time,
and then asked,--

"And who is to undertake the task of exploring?"

Prompt was Dick's answer:--

"Tom and I."

"And leave us here?" suggested the lady.

"Yes; to take care of you, there will be Hercules, Bat, Actæon and
Austin. Negoro, too, I presume, means to remain here," said Dick,
glancing towards the cook.

"Perhaps," replied Negoro, sparing as ever of his words.

"We shall take Dingo," added Dick; "likely enough he may be useful."

At the sound of his name the dog had entered the grotto. A short bark
seemed to testify his approval of Dick's proposal.

Mrs. Weldon was silent. She looked sad and thoughtful. It was hard to
reconcile herself to the division of the party. She was aware that the
separation would not be for long, but she could not suppress a certain
feeling of nervousness. Was it not possible that some natives,
attracted by the wreck, would assault them in hopes of plunder?

Every argument he could think of, Dick brought forward to reassure the
lady. He told her that the Indians were perfectly harmless, and
entirely different to the savage tribes of Africa and Polynesia; there
was no reason to apprehend any mischief, even if they should chance to
encounter them, which was itself extremely unlikely. No doubt the
separation would have its inconveniences, but they would be
insignificant compared with the difficulty of traversing the country
_en masse_. Tom and he would have far greater freedom if they went
alone, and could make their investigations much more thoroughly.
Finally he promised that if within two days they failed to discover
human habitation, they would return to the grotto forthwith.

"I confess, however," he added, "that I have little expectation of
being able to ascertain our true position, until I have penetrated some
distance into the country."

There was nothing in Dick's representations but what commanded Mrs.
Weldon's assent as reasonable. It was simply her own nervousness, she
acknowledged, that made her hesitate; but it was only with extreme
reluctance that she finally yielded to the proposition.

"And what, Mr. Benedict, is your opinion of my proposal?" said Dick,
turning to the entomologist.

"I?" answered Cousin Benedict, looking somewhat bewildered, "Oh, I am
agreeable to anything. I dare say I shall find some specimens. I think
I will go and look at once."

"Take my advice, and don't go far away," replied Dick.

"All right; I shall take care of myself."

"And don't be bringing back a lot of mosquitoes," said old Tom
mischievously.

With his box under his arm, the naturalist left the grotto.

Negoro followed almost immediately. He did not take the same direction
as Benedict up the cliff, but for the second time bent his steps
towards the river, and proceeded along its bank till he was out of
sight.

It was not long before Jack's exertions told upon him, and he fell into
a sound sleep. Mrs. Weldon having gently laid him on Nan's lap,
wandered out and made her way to the water's edge. She was soon joined
by Dick and the negroes, who wanted to see whether it was possible to
get to the "Pilgrim," and secure any articles that might be serviceable
for future use. The reef on which the schooner had stranded was now
quite dry, and the carcase of the vessel which had been partially
covered at high water was lying in the midst of _debris_ of the most
promiscuous character. The wide difference between high and low-water
mark caused Dick Sands no little surprise. He knew that the tides on
the shores of the Pacific were very inconsiderable; in his own mind,
however, he came to the conclusion that the phenomenon was to be
explained by the unusually high wind that had been blowing on the coast.

Not without emotion could Mrs. Weldon, or indeed any of them, behold
the unfortunate ship upon which they had spent so many eventful days,
lying dismasted on her side. But there was little time for sentiment.
If they wished to visit the hull before it finally went to pieces there
must be no delay.

Hoisting themselves by some loose rigging that was hanging from the
deck, Dick and several of the negroes contrived to make their way into
the interior of the hull. Dick left his men to gather together all they
could in the way of food and drink from the store-room, and himself
went straight to the stern cabin, into which the water had not
penetrated. Here he found four excellent Purday's Remington rifles and
a hundred cartridges; with these he determined to arm his party, in
case they should be attacked by Indians. He also chose six of the
strongest of the cutlasses that are used for slicing up dead whales;
and did not forget the little toy gun which was Jack's special
property. Unexpectedly he found a pocket-compass, which he was only too
glad to appropriate. What a boon it would have been had he discovered
it earlier! The ship's charts in the fore-cabin were too much injured
by water to be of any further service. Nearly everything was either
lost or spoiled, but the misfortune was not felt very acutely because
there was ample provision for a few days, and it seemed useless to
burden themselves with more than was necessary. Dick hardly needed Mrs.
Weldon's advice to secure all the money that might be on board, but
after the most diligent search he failed to discover more than five
hundred dollars. This was a subject of perplexity. Mrs. Weldon herself
had had a considerably larger sum than this, and Captain Hull was known
always to keep a good reserve in hand. There was but one way to solve
the mystery. Some one had been beforehand to the wreck. It could not be
any of the negroes, as not one of them had for a moment left the
grotto. Suspicion naturally fell upon Negoro, who had been out alone
upon the shore. Morose and cold-blooded as the man was, Dick hardly
knew why he should suspect him of the crime of theft; nevertheless, he
determined to cross-examine him, and, if need be, to have him searched,
as soon as he came back.

[Illustration: Not without emotion could Mrs. Weldon, or indeed any of
them, behold the unfortunate ship.]

The day wore onwards to its close. The sun was approaching the vernal
equinox, and sank almost perpendicularly on to the horizon. Twilight
was very short, and the rapidity with which darkness came on confirmed
Dick in his belief that they had got ashore at some spot lying between
the tropic of Capricorn and the equator.

They all assembled in the grotto again for the purpose of getting some
sleep.

"Another rough night coming on!" said Tom, pointing to the heavy clouds
that hung over the horizon.

"No doubt, Tom!" answered Dick, "and I think we may congratulate
ourselves on being safe out of our poor ship."

As the night could not be otherwise than very dark, it was arranged
that the negroes should take their turns in keeping guard at the
entrance of the grotto. Dingo also would be upon the alert.

Benedict had not yet returned. Hercules shouted his name with the full
strength of his capacious lungs, and shortly afterwards the
entomologist was seen making his way down the face of the cliff at the
imminent risk of breaking his neck. He was in a great rage. He had not
found a single insect worth having, scorpions, scolopendra, and other
myriapoda were in the forest in abundance; but not one of these of
course could be allowed a place in his collection.

"Have I come six thousand miles for this?" he cried: "have I endured
storm and shipwreck only to be cast where not a hexapod is to be seen?
The country is detestable! I shall not stay in it another hour!"

Ever gentle to his eccentricities, Mrs. Weldon soothed him as she would
a child, she told him that he had better take some rest now, and most
likely he would have better luck to-morrow.

Cousin Benedict had hardly been pacified when Tom remarked that Negoro
too had not returned.

"Never mind!" said Bat, "his room is as good as his company."

"I cannot say that I altogether think so. The man is no favourite of
mine, but I like him better under my own eye," said Mrs. Weldon.

"Perhaps he has his own reasons for keeping away," said Dick, and
taking Mrs. Weldon aside, he communicated to her his suspicions of the
fellow's dishonesty.

He found that she coincided with him in her view of Negoro's conduct;
but she did not agree with him in his proposal to have him searched at
once. If he returned, she should be convinced that he had deposited the
money in some secret spot; and as there would be no proof of his guilt,
it would be better to leave him, at least for a time, uninterrogated.

[Illustration: The entomologist was seen making his way down the face
of the cliff at the imminent risk of breaking his neck.]

Dick was convinced by her representations, and promised to act upon her
advice.

Before they resigned themselves to sleep, they had repeatedly summoned
Negoro back, but he either could not or would not hear. Mrs. Weldon and
Dick scarcely knew what to think; unless he had lost his way; it was
unaccountable why he should be wandering about alone on a dark night in
a strange country.

Presently Dingo was heard barking furiously. He had left the opening of
the grotto, and was evidently down at the water's edge. Imagining that
Negoro must be coming, Dick sent three of the negroes in the direction
of the river to meet him; but when they reached the bank not a soul
could be seen, and as Dingo was quiet again, they made their way back
to the grotto.

Excepting the man left on watch, they now all lay down, hoping to get
some repose. Mrs. Weldon, however, could not sleep. The land for which
she had sighed so ardently had been reached, but it had failed to give
either the security or the comfort which she had anticipated!




CHAPTER XV.

A STRANGER.


At daybreak, next morning, Austin, who happened to be on guard, heard
Dingo bark, and noticed that he started up and ran towards the river.
Arousing the inmates of the grotto, he announced to them that some one
was coming.

"It isn't Negoro," said Tom; "Dingo would bark louder than that if
Negoro were to be seen."

"Who, then, can it be?" asked Mrs. Weldon, with an inquiring glance
towards Dick.

"We must wait and see, madam," replied Dick quietly.

Bidding Bat, Austin, and Hercules follow his example, Dick Sands took
up a cutlass and a rifle, into the breach of which he slipped a
cartridge. Thus armed, the four young men made their way towards the
river bank. Tom and Actæon were left with Mrs. Weldon at the entrance
of the grotto.

The sun was just rising. Its rays, intercepted by the lofty range of
mountains in the east, did not fall directly on the cliff; but the sea
to its western horizon was sparkling in the sunbeams as the party
marched along the shore. Dingo was motionless as a setter, but did not
cease barking. It soon proved not to be his old enemy who was
disturbing him. A man, who was not Negoro, appeared round the angle of
the cliff, and advancing cautiously along the bank of the stream,
seemed by his gestures to be endeavouring to pacify the dog, with which
an encounter would certainly have been by no means desirable.

"That's not Negoro!" said Hercules.

[Illustration: "Good morning, my young friend."]

"No loss for any of us," muttered Bat.

"You are right," replied Dick; "perhaps he is a native; let us hope he
may be able to tell us our whereabouts, and save us the trouble of
exploring."

With their rifles on their shoulders, they advanced steadily towards
the new arrival. The stranger, on becoming aware of their approach,
manifested great surprise; he was apparently puzzled as to how they had
reached the shore, for the "Pilgrim" had been entirely broken up during
the night, and the spars that were floating about had probably been too
few and too scattered to attract his attention. His first attitude
seemed to betray something of fear; and raising to his shoulder a gun
that had been slung to his belt, he began to retrace his steps; but
conciliatory gestures on the part of Dick quickly reassured him, and
after a moment's hesitation, he continued to advance.

He was a man of about forty years of age, strongly built, with a keen,
bright eye, grizzly hair and beard, and a complexion tanned as with
constant exposure to the forest air. He wore a broad-brimmed hat, a
kind of leather jerkin, or tunic, and long boots reaching nearly to his
knees. To his high heels was fastened a pair of wide-rowelled spurs,
which clanked as he moved.

Dick Sands in an instant saw that he was not looking upon one of the
roving Indians of the pampas, but upon one of those adventurers, often
of very doubtful character, who are not unfrequently to be met with in
the remotest quarters of the earth. Clearly this was neither an Indian
nor a Spaniard. His erect, not to say rigid deportment, and the reddish
hue with which his hair and beard were streaked, betokened him to be of
Anglo-Saxon origin, a conjecture which was at once confirmed when upon
Dick's wishing him "good morning," he replied in unmistakable English,
with hardly a trace of foreign accent,--

"Good morning, my young friend."

He stepped forward, and having shaken hands with Dick, nodded to all
his companions.

"Are you English?" he asked.

"No; we are Americans," replied Dick.

"North or South?" inquired the man.

"North," Dick answered.

The information seemed to afford the stranger no little satisfaction,
and he again wrung Dick's hand with all the enthusiasm of a
fellow-countryman.

"And may I ask what brings you here?" he continued.

Before, however, Dick had time to reply, the stranger had courteously
raised his hat, and, looking round, Dick saw that his bow was intended
for Mrs. Weldon, who had just reached the river-bank. She proceeded to
tell him the particulars of how they had been shipwrecked, and how the
vessel had gone to pieces on the reefs.

A look of pity crossed the man's face as he listened, and he cast his
eye, as it might be involuntarily, upon the sea, in order to discern
some vestige of the stranded ship.

"Ah! there is nothing to be seen of our poor schooner!" said Dick
mournfully; "the last of her was broken up in the storm last night."

"And now," interposed Mrs. Weldon, "can you tell us where we are?"

"Where?" exclaimed the man, with every indication of surprise at her
question; "why, on the coast of South America, of course!"

"But on what part? are we near Peru?" Dick inquired eagerly.

"No, my lad, no; you are more to the south; you are on the coast of
Bolivia; close to the borders of Chili."

"A good distance, I suppose, from Lima?" asked Dick.

"From Lima? yes, a long way; Lima is far to the north."

"And what is the name of that promontory?" Dick said, pointing to the
adjacent headland.

"That, I confess, is more than I am able to tell you," replied the
stranger; "for although I have travelled a great deal in the interior
of the country, I have never before visited this part of the coast."

Dick pondered in thoughtful silence over the information he had thus
received. He had no reason to doubt its accuracy; according to his own
reckoning he would have expected to come ashore somewhere between the
latitudes of 27° and 30°; and by this stranger's showing he had made
the latitude 25°; the discrepancy was not very great; it was not more
than might be accounted for by the action of the currents, which he
knew he had been unable to estimate; moreover, the deserted character
of the whole shore inclined him to believe more easily that he was in
Lower Bolivia.

Whilst this conversation was going on, Mrs. Weldon, whose suspicions
had been excited by Negoro's disappearance, had been scrutinizing the
stranger with the utmost attention; but she could detect nothing either
in his manner or in his words to give her any cause to doubt his good
faith.

"Pardon me," she said presently; "but you do not seem to me to be a
native of Peru?"

"No; like yourself, I am an American, Mrs. ----;" he paused, as if
waiting to be told her name.

The lady smiled, and gave her name; he thanked her, and continued,--

"My name is Harris. I was born in South Carolina; but it is now twenty
years since I left my home for the pampas of Bolivia; imagine,
therefore, how much pleasure it gives me to come across some countrymen
of my own."

"Do you live in this part of the province, Mr. Harris?" Mrs. Weldon
asked.

"No, indeed; far away; I live down to the south, close to the borders
of Chili. At present I am taking a journey north-eastwards to Atacama."

"Atacama!" exclaimed Dick; "are we anywhere near the desert of Atacama?"

"Yes, my young friend," rejoined Harris, "you are just on the edge of
it. It extends far beyond those mountains which you see on the horizon,
and is one of the most curious and least explored parts of the
continent."

"And are you travelling through it alone?" Mrs. Weldon inquired.

"Yes, quite alone; and it is not the first time I have performed the
journey. One of my brothers owns a large farm, the hacienda of San
Felice, about 200 miles from here, and I have occasion now and then to
pay him business visits."

[Illustration: "He is my little son."]

After a moment's hesitation, as if he were weighing a sudden thought,
he continued,--

"I am on my way there now, and if you will accompany me I can promise
you a hearty welcome, and my brother will be most happy to do his best
to provide you with means of conveyance to San Francisco."

Mrs. Weldon had hardly begun to express her thanks for the proposal
when he said abruptly,--

"Are these negroes your slaves?"

"Slaves! sir," replied Mrs. Weldon, drawing herself up proudly; "we
have no slaves in the United States. The south has now long followed
the example of the north. Slavery is abolished."

"I beg your pardon, madam. I had forgotten that the war of 1862 had
solved that question. But seeing these fellows with you, I thought
perhaps they might be in your service," he added, with a slight tone of
irony.

"We are very proud to be of any service to Mrs. Weldon," Tom interposed
with dignity, "but we are no man's property. It is true I was sold for
a slave when I was six years old; but I have long since had my freedom;
and so has my son. Bat here, and all his friends, were born of free
parents."

"Ah! well then, I have to congratulate you," replied Harris, in a
manner that jarred very sensibly upon Mrs. Weldon's feelings; but she
said nothing.

Harris added,--

"I can assure you that you are as safe here in Bolivia as you would be
in New England."

He had not finished speaking, when Jack, followed by Nan, came out of
the grotto. The child was rubbing his eyes, having only just awakened
from his night's sleep. Catching sight of his mother, he darted towards
her.

"What a charming little boy!" exclaimed Harris.

"He is my little son," said Mrs. Weldon, kissing the child by way of
morning greeting.

"Ah, madam, I am sure you must have suffered doubly on his account.
Will the little man let me kiss him too?"

But there was something in the stranger's appearance that did not take
Jack's fancy, and he shrank back timidly to his mother's side.

"You must excuse him, sir; he is very shy."

"Never mind," said Harris; "we shall be better acquainted by-and-by.
When we get to my brother's, he shall have a nice little pony to ride."

But not even this tempting offer seemed to have any effect in coaxing
Jack into a more genial mood. He kept fast hold of his mother's hand,
and she, somewhat vexed at his behaviour, and anxious that no offence
should be given to a man who appeared so friendly in his intentions,
hastened to turn the conversation to another topic.

Meantime Dick Sands had been considering Harris's proposal. Upon the
whole, the plan of making their way to the hacienda of San Felice
seemed to commend itself to his judgment; but he could not conceal from
himself that a journey of 200 miles across plains and forests, without
any means of transport, would be extremely fatiguing. On expressing his
doubts on this point, he was met with the reply,--

"Oh, that can be managed well enough, young man; just round the corner
of the cliff there I have a horse, which is quite at the disposal of
the lady and her son; and by easy stages of ten miles or so a day, it
will do the rest of us no harm to travel on foot. Besides," he added,
"when I spoke of the journey being 200 miles, I was thinking of
following, as I usually do, the course of the river; but by taking a
short cut across the forest, we may reduce the distance by nearly
eighty miles."

Mrs. Weldon was about to say how grateful she was, but Harris
anticipated her.

"Not a word, madam, I beg you. You cannot thank me better than by
accepting my offer. I confess I have never crossed this forest, but I
am so much accustomed to the pampas that I have little fear of losing
my way. The only difficulty is in the matter of provisions, as I have
only supplied myself with enough to carry me on to San Felice."

"As to provisions," replied Mrs. Weldon, "we have enough and to spare;
and we shall be more than willing to share everything with you."

"That is well," answered Harris; "then there can be no reason why we
should not start at once."

He was turning away with the intention of fetching his horse, when Dick
Sands detained him. True to his seaman's instincts, the young sailor
felt that he should be much more at his ease on the sea-shore than
traversing the heart of an unknown forest.

"Pardon me, Mr. Harris," he began, "but instead of taking so long a
journey across the desert of Atacama, would it not be far better for us
to follow the coast either northwards or southwards, until we reach the
nearest seaport?"

A frown passed over Harris's countenance.

"I know very little about the coast," he answered; "but I know enough
to assure you that there is no town to the north within 300 or 400
miles."

"Then why should we not go south?" persisted Dick.

"You would then have to travel to Chili, which is almost as far; and,
under your circumstances, I should not advise you to skirt the pampas
of the Argentine Republic. For my own part, I could not accompany you."

"But do not the vessels which ply between Chili and Peru come within
sight of this coast?" interposed Mrs. Weldon.

"No, madam; they keep out so far to sea that there would not be the
faintest chance of your hailing one."

"You seem to have another question to ask Mr. Harris," Mrs. Weldon
continued, addressing Dick, who still looked rather doubtful.

Dick replied that he was about to inquire at what port he would be
likely to find a ship to convey their party to San Francisco.

"That I really cannot tell you, my young friend," rejoined Harris; "I
can only repeat my promise that we will furnish you with the means of
conveyance from San Felice to Atacama, where no doubt you will obtain
all the information you require."

"I hope you will not think that Dick is insensible to your kindness,
Mr. Harris," said Mrs. Weldon, apologetically.

"On the contrary," promptly observed Dick; "I fully appreciate it; I
only wish we had been cast ashore upon a spot where we should have had
no need to intrude upon his generosity."

"I assure you, madam, it gives me unbounded pleasure to serve you in
any way," said Harris; "it is, as I have told you, not often that I
come in contact with any of my own countrymen."

"Then we accept your offer as frankly as it is made," replied the lady,
adding; "but I cannot consent to deprive you of your horse. I am a very
good walker."

"So am I," said Harris, with a bow, "and consequently I intend you and
your little son to ride. I am used to long tramps through the pampas.
Besides, it is not at all unlikely that we shall come across some of
the workpeople belonging to the hacienda; if so, they will be able to
give us a mount."

Convinced that it would only be thwarting Mrs. Weldon's wishes to throw
any further impediment in the way, Dick Sands suppressed his desire to
raise fresh obstacles, and simply asked how soon they ought to start.

"This very day, at once," said Harris quickly.

"So soon?" asked Dick.

"Yes. The rainy season begins in April, and the sooner we are at San
Felice the better. The way through the forest is the safest as well as
the shortest, for we shall be less likely to meet any of the nomad
Indians, who are notorious robbers."

Without making any direct reply, Dick proceeded to instruct the negroes
to choose such of the provisions as were most easy of transport, and to
make them up into packages, that every one might carry a due share.
Hercules with his usual good nature professed himself willing to carry
the entire load; a proposal, however, to which Dick would not listen
for a moment.

"You are a fine fellow, Hercules" said Harris, scrutinizing the giant
with the eye of a connoisseur; "you would be worth something in the
African market."

"Those who want me now must catch me first," retorted Hercules, with a
grin.

The services of all hands were enlisted, and in a comparatively short
time sufficient food was packed up to supply the party for about ten
days' march.

"You must allow us to show you what hospitality is in our power," said
Mrs. Weldon, addressing her new acquaintance; "our breakfast will be
ready in a quarter of an hour, and we shall be happy if you will join
us."

"It will give me much pleasure," answered Harris, gaily; "I will employ
the interval in fetching my horse, who has breakfasted already."

"I will accompany you," said Dick.

"By all means, my young friend; come with me, and I will show you the
lower part of the river."

While they were gone, Hercules was sent in search of Cousin Benedict,
who was wandering on the top of the cliff in quest of some wonderful
insect, which, of course, was not to be found. Without asking his
permission, Hercules unceremoniously brought him back to Mrs. Weldon,
who explained how they were about to start upon a ten days' march into
the interior of the country. The entomologist was quite satisfied with
the arrangement, and declared himself ready for a march across the
entire continent, as long as he was free to be adding to his collection
on the way.

Thus assured of her cousin's acquiescence in her plans; Mrs. Weldon
proceeded to prepare such a substantial meal as she hoped would
invigorate them all for the approaching journey.

Harris and Dick Sands, meantime, had turned the corner of the cliff,
and walked about 300 paces along the shore until they came to a tree to
which a horse was tethered. The creature neighed as it recognized its
master. It was a strong-built animal, of a kind that Dick had not seen
before, although its long neck and crupper, short loins, flat shoulders
and arched forehead indicated that it was of Arabian breed.

[Illustration: They came to a tree to which a horse was tethered.]

"Plenty of strength here," Harris said, as after unfastening the horse,
he took it by the bridle and began to lead it along the shore.

Dick made no reply; he was casting a hasty glance at the forest which
enclosed them on either hand; it was an unattractive sight, but he
observed nothing to give him any particular ground for uneasiness.

Turning round, he said abruptly,--

"Did you meet a Portuguese last night, named Negoro?"

"Negoro? who is Negoro?" asked Harris, in a tone of surprise.

"He was our ship's cook; but he has disappeared."

"Drowned, probably," said Harris indifferently.

"No, he was not drowned; he was with us during the evening, but left
afterwards; I thought perhaps you might have met him along the
river-side, as you came that way."

"No," said Harris, "I saw no one; if your cook ventured alone into the
forest, most likely he has lost his way; it is possible we may pick him
up upon our road."

When they arrived at the grotto, they found breakfast duly prepared.
Like the supper of the previous evening it consisted mainly of corned
beef and biscuit. Harris did ample justice to the repast.

"There is no fear of our starving as we go," he observed to Mrs.
Weldon; "but I can hardly say so much for the unfortunate Portuguese,
your cook, of whom my young friend here has been speaking."

"Ah! has Dick been telling you about Negoro?" Mrs. Weldon said.

Dick explained that he had been inquiring whether Mr. Harris had
happened to meet him in the direction he had come.

"I saw nothing of him," Harris repeated; "and as he has deserted you,
you need not give yourselves any concern about him." And apparently
glad to turn the subject, he said, "Now, madam, I am at your service;
shall we start at once?"

It was agreed that there was no cause for delay. Each one took up the
package that had been assigned him. Mrs. Weldon, with Hercules' help,
mounted the horse, and Jack, with his miniature gun slung across his
shoulder, was placed astride in front of her. Without a thought of
acknowledging the kindness of the good-natured stranger in providing
him so enjoyable a ride, the heedless little fellow declared himself
quite capable of guiding the "gentleman's horse," and when to indulge
him the bridle was put into his hand, he looked as proud as though he
had been appointed leader of the whole caravan.




CHAPTER XVI.

THROUGH THE FOREST.


Although there was no obvious cause for apprehension, it cannot be
denied that it was with a certain degree of foreboding that Dick Sands
first entered that dense forest, through which for the next ten days
they were all to wend their toilsome way.

Mrs. Weldon, on the contrary, was full of confidence and hope. A woman
and a mother, she might have been expected to be conscious of anxiety
at the peril to which she might be exposing herself and her child; and
doubtless she would have been sensible of alarm if her mind had not
been fully satisfied upon two points; first, that the portion of the
pampas they were about to traverse was little infested either by
natives or by dangerous beasts; and secondly, that she was under the
protection of a guide so trustworthy as she believed Harris to be.

The entrance to the forest was hardly more than three hundred paces up
the river. An order of march had been arranged which was to be observed
as closely as possible throughout the journey. At the head of the troop
were Harris and Dick Sands, one armed with his long gun, the other with
his Remington; next came Bat and Austin, each carrying a gun and a
cutlass, then Mrs. Weldon and Jack, on horseback, closely followed by
Tom and old Nan, while Actæon with the fourth Remington, and Hercules
with a huge hatchet in his waist-belt, brought up the rear. Dingo had
no especial place in the procession, but wandered to and fro at his
pleasure. Ever since he had been cast ashore Dick had noticed a
remarkable change in the dog's behaviour; the animal was in a constant
state of agitation, always apparently on the search for some lost
scent, and repeatedly giving vent to a low growl, which seemed to
proceed from grief rather than from rage.

As for Cousin Benedict, his movements were permitted to be nearly as
erratic as Dingo's; nothing but a leading-string could possibly have
kept him in the ranks. With his tin box under his arm, and his
butterfly net in his hand, and his huge magnifying-glass suspended from
his neck, he would be sometimes far ahead, sometimes a long way behind,
and at the risk of being attacked by some venomous snake, would make
frantic dashes into the tall grass whenever he espied some attractive
orthoptera or other insect which he thought might be honoured by a
place in his collection.

In one hour after starting Mrs. Weldon had called to him a dozen times
without the slightest effect. At last she told him seriously that if he
would not give up chasing the insects at a distance, she should be
obliged to take possession of his tin box.

"Take away my box!" he cried, with as much horror as if she had
threatened to tear out his vitals.

"Yes, your box and your net too!"

"My box and my net! but surely not my spectacles!" almost shrieked the
excited entomologist.

"Yes, and your spectacles as well!" added Mrs. Weldon mercilessly; "I
am glad you have reminded me of another means of reducing you to
obedience!"

The triple penalty of which he was thus warned had the effect of
keeping him from wandering away for the best part of the next hour, but
he was soon once more missing from the ranks; he was manifestly
incorrigible; the deprivation of box, net, and spectacles would, it was
acknowledged, be utterly without avail to prevent him from rambling.
Accordingly it was thought better to let him have his own way,
especially as Hercules volunteered to keep his eye upon him, and to
endeavour to guard the worthy naturalist as carefully as he would
himself protect some precious specimen of a lepidoptera. Further
anxiety on his account was thus put to rest.

[Illustration: The way across the forest could scarcely be called a
path.]

In spite of Harris's confident assertion that they were little likely
to be molested by any of the nomad Indians, the whole company rejoiced
in feeling that they were well armed, and they resolved to keep in a
compact body. The way across the forest could scarcely be called a
path; it was, in fact, little more than the track of animals, and
progress along it was necessarily very slow; indeed it seemed
impossible, at the rate they started, to accomplish more than five or
six miles in the course of twelve hours.

The weather was beautifully fine; the sun ascended nearly to the
zenith, and its rays, descending almost perpendicularly, caused a
degree of heat which, as Harris pointed out, would have been
unendurable upon the open plain, but was here pleasantly tempered by
the shelter of the foliage.

Most of the trees were quite strange to them. To an experienced eye
they were such as were remarkable more for their character then for
their size. Here, on one side, was the bauhinia, or mountain ebony;
there, on the other, the molompi or pterocarpus, its trunk exuding
large quantities of resin, and of which the strong light wood makes
excellent oars or paddles; further on were fustics heavily charged with
colouring matter, and guaiacums, twelve feet in diameter, surpassing
the ordinary kind in magnitude, yet far inferior in quality.

Dick Sands kept perpetually asking Harris to tell him the names of all
these trees and plants.

"Have you never been on the coast of South America before?" replied
Harris, without giving the explicit information that was sought.

"Never," said Dick; "never before. Nor do I recollect ever having seen
any one who has."

"But surely you have explored the coasts of Columbia or Patagonia,"
Harris continued.

Dick avowed that he had never had the chance.

"But has Mrs. Weldon never visited these parts? Our countrymen, I know,
are great travellers."

"No," answered Mrs. Weldon; "my husband's business called him
occasionally to New Zealand, but I have accompanied him nowhere else.
With this part of Lower Bolivia we are totally unacquainted."

"Then, madam, I can only assure you that you will see a most remarkable
country, in every way a very striking contrast to the regions of Peru,
Brazil, and the Argentine republic. Its animal and vegetable products
would fill a naturalist with unbounded wonder. May I not declare it a
lucky chance that has brought you here?"

"Do not say chance, Mr. Harris, if you please."

"Well, then, madam; providence, if you prefer it," said Harris, with
the air of a man incapable of recognizing the distinction.

After finding that there was no one amongst them who was acquainted in
any way with the country through which they were travelling, Harris
seemed to exhibit an evident pleasure in pointing out and describing by
name the various wonders of the forest. Had Cousin Benedict's
attainments included a knowledge of botany he would have found himself
in a fine field for researches, and might perchance have discovered
novelties to which his own name could be appended in the catalogues of
science. But he was no botanist; in fact, as a rule, he held all
blossoms in aversion, on the ground that they entrapped insects into
their corollæ, and poisoned them sometimes with venomous juices. New
and rare insects, however, seemed hereabouts to be wanting.

Occasionally the soil became marshy, and they all had to wend their way
over a perfect network of tiny rivulets that were affluents of the
river from which they had started. Sometimes these rivulets were so
wide that they could not be passed without a long search for some spot
where they could be forded; their banks were all very damp, and in many
places abounded with a kind of reed, which Harris called by its proper
name of papyrus.

As soon as the marshy district had been passed, the forest resumed its
original aspect, the footway becoming narrow as ever. Harris pointed
out some very fine ebony-trees, larger than the common sort, and
yielding a wood darker and more durable than what is ordinarily seen in
the market. There were also more mango-trees than might have been
expected at this distance from the sea; a beautiful white lichen
enveloped their trunks like a fur; but in spite of their luxuriant
foliage and delicious fruit, Harris said that there was not a native
who would venture to propagate the species, as the superstition of the
country is that "whoever plants a mango, dies!"

[Illustration: Occasionally the soil became marshy.]

At noon a halt was made for the purpose of rest and refreshment. During
the afternoon they arrived at some gently rising ground, not the first
slopes of hills, but an insulated plateau which appeared to unite
mountains and plains. Notwithstanding that the trees were far less
crowded and more inclined to grow in detached groups, the numbers of
herbaceous plants with which the soil was covered rendered progress no
less difficult than it was before. The general aspect of the scene was
not unlike an East Indian jungle. Less luxuriant indeed than in the
lower valley of the river, the vegetation was far more abundant than
that of the temperate zones either of the Old or New continents. Indigo
grew in great profusion, and, according to Harris's representation, was
the most encroaching plant in the whole country; no sooner, he said,
was a field left untilled, than it was overrun by this parasite, which
sprang up with the rank growth of thistles or nettles.

One tree which might have been expected to be common in this part of
the continent seemed entirely wanting. This was the caoutchouc. Of the
various trees from which India-rubber is procured, such as the Ficus
prinoides, the Castilioa elastica, the Cecropia peltata, the Callophora
utilis, the Cameraria latifolia, and especially the Siphonia elastica,
all of which abound in the provinces of South America, not a single
specimen was to be seen. Dick had promised to show Jack an
India-rubber-tree, and the child, who had conjured up visions of
squeaking dolls, balls, and other toys growing upon its branches, was
loud and constant in his expressions of disappointment.

"Never mind, my little man," said Harris; "have patience, and you shall
see hundreds of India-rubber-trees when you get to the hacienda."

"And will they be nice and elastic?" asked Jack, whose ideas upon the
subject were of the vaguest order.

"Oh, yes, they will stretch as long as you like," Harris answered,
laughing. "But here is something to amuse you," he added, and as he
spoke, he gathered a fruit that looked as tempting as a peach.

"You are quite sure that it is safe to give it him?" said Mrs. Weldon
anxiously.

"To satisfy you, madam, I will eat one first myself."

The example he set was soon followed by all the rest. The fruit was a
mango; that which had been so opportunely discovered was of the sort
that ripens in March or April; there is a later kind which ripens in
September. With his mouth full of juice, Jack pronounced that it was
very nice, but did not seem to be altogether diverted from his sense of
disappointment at not coming to an India-rubber-tree. Evidently the
little man thought himself rather injured.

"And Dick promised me some humming-birds too!" he murmured.

"Plenty of humming-birds for you, when you get to the farm; lots of
them where my brother lives," said Harris.

And to say the truth, there was nothing extravagant in the way the
child's anticipations had been raised, for in Bolivia humming-birds are
found in great abundance. The Indians, who weave their plumage into all
kinds of artistic designs, have bestowed the most poetical epithets
upon these gems of the feathered race. They call them "rays of the
sun," and "tresses of the day-star;" at one time they will describe
them as "king of flowers," at another as "blossoms of heaven kissing
blossoms of earth," or as "the jewel that reflects the sunbeam." In
fact their imagination seems to have shaped a suitable distinction for
almost every one of the 150 known species of this dazzling little
beauty.

But however numerous humming-birds might be expected to be in the
Bolivian forest, they proved scarce enough at present, and Jack had to
content himself with Harris's representations that they did not like
solitude, but would be found plentifully at San Felice, where they
would be heard all day long humming like a spinning-wheel. Already Jack
said he longed to be there, a wish that was so unanimously echoed by
all the rest, that they resolved that no stoppage should be allowed
beyond what was absolutely indispensable.

After a time the forest began to alter its aspect. The trees were even
less crowded, opening now and then into wide glades. The soil, cropping
up above its carpet of verdure, exhibited veins of rose granite and
syenite, like plates of lapis lazuli; on some of the higher ground, the
fleshy tubers of the sarsaparilla plant, growing in a hopeless
entanglement, made progress a matter of still greater difficulty than
in the narrow tracks of the dense forest.

At sunset the travellers found that they had accomplished about eight
miles from their starting-point. They could not prognosticate what
hardships might be in store for them on future days, but it was certain
that the experiences of the first day had been neither eventful nor
very fatiguing. It was now unanimously agreed that they should make a
halt for the night, and as little was to be apprehended from the
attacks either of man or beast, it was considered unnecessary to form
anything like a regular encampment. One man on guard, to be relieved
every few hours, was presumed to be sufficient. Admirable shelter was
offered by an enormous mango, the spreading foliage of which formed a
kind of natural verandah, sweeping the ground so thoroughly that any
one who chose could find sleeping-quarters in its very branches.

Simultaneously with the halting of the party there was heard a
deafening tumult in the upper boughs. The mango was the roosting place
of a colony of grey parrots, a noisy, quarrelsome, and rapacious race,
of whose true characteristics the specimens seen in confinement in
Europe give no true conception. Their screeching and chattering were
such a nuisance that Dick Sands wanted to fire a shot into the middle
of them, but Harris seriously dissuaded him, urging that the report of
firearms would only serve to reveal their own presence, whilst their
greatest safety lay in perfect silence.

Supper was prepared. There was little need of cooking. The meal, as
before, consisted of preserved meat and biscuit. Fresh water, which
they flavoured with a few drops of rum, was obtained from an adjacent
stream which trickled through the grass. By way of dessert they had an
abundance of ripe mangoes, and the only drawback to their general
enjoyment was the discordant outcry which the parrots kept up, as it
were in protest against the invasion of what they held to be their own
rightful domain.

It was nearly dark when supper was ended. The evening shade crept
slowly upwards to the tops of the trees, which soon stood out in sharp
relief against the lighter background of the sky, while the stars, one
by one, began to peep. The wind dropped, and ceased to murmur through
the foliage; to the general relief, the parrots desisted from their
clatter; and as Nature hushed herself to rest, she seemed to be
inviting all her children to follow her example.

"Had we not better light a good large fire?" asked Dick.

"By no means," said Harris; "the nights are not cold, and under this
wide-spreading mango the ground is not likely to be damp. Besides, as I
have told you before, our best security consists in our taking care to
attract no attention whatever from without."

Mrs. Weldon interposed,--

"It may be true enough that we have nothing to dread from the Indians,
but is it certain that there are no dangerous quadrupeds against which
we are bound to be upon our guard?"

Harris answered,--

"I can positively assure you, madam, that there are no animals here but
such as would be infinitely more afraid of you than you would be of
them."

"Are there any woods without wild beasts?" asked Jack.

"All woods are not alike, my boy," replied Harris; "this wood is a
great park. As the Indians say, 'Es como el Pariso;' it is like
Paradise."

Jack persisted,--

"There must be snakes, and lions, and tigers."

"Ask your mamma, my boy," said Harris, "whether she ever heard of lions
and tigers in America?"

Mrs. Weldon was endeavouring to put her little boy at his ease on this
point, when Cousin Benedict interposed, saying that although there were
no lions or tigers, there were plenty of jaguars and panthers in the
New World.

"And won't they kill us?" demanded Jack eagerly, his apprehensions once
more aroused.

"Kill you?" laughed Harris; "why, your friend Hercules here could
strangle them, two at a time, one in each hand!"

"But, please, don't let the panthers come near me!" pleaded Jack,
evidently alarmed.

"No, no, Master Jack, they shall not come near you. I will give them a
good grip first," and the giant displayed his two rows of huge white
teeth.

Dick Sands proposed that it should be the four younger negroes who
should be assigned the task of keeping watch during the night, in
attendance upon himself; but Actæon insisted so strongly upon the
necessity of Dick's having his full share of rest, that the others were
soon brought to the same conviction, and Dick was obliged to yield.

Jack valiantly announced his intention of taking one watch, but his
sleepy eyelids made it only too plain that he did not know the extent
of his own fatigue.

"I am sure there are wolves here," he said.

"Only such wolves as Dingo would swallow at a mouthful," said Harris.

"But I am sure there are wolves," he insisted, repeating the word
"wolves" again and again, until he tumbled off to sleep against the
side of old Nan. Mrs. Weldon gave her little son a silent kiss; it was
her loving "good night."

Cousin Benedict was missing. Some little time before, he had slipped
away in search of "cocuyos," or fire-flies, which he had heard were
common in South America.

Those singular insects emit a bright bluish light from two spots on the
side of the thorax, and their colours are so brilliant that they are
used as ornaments for ladies' headdresses. Hoping to secure some
specimens for his box, Benedict would have wandered to an unlimited
distance; but Hercules, faithful to his undertaking, soon discovered
him, and heedless of the naturalist's protestations and vociferations,
promptly escorted him back to the general rendezvous.

Hercules himself was the first to keep watch, but with this exception,
the whole party, in another hour, were wrapped in peaceful slumber.

[Illustration: Hercules himself was the first to keep watch.]




CHAPTER XVII

MISGIVINGS.


Most travellers who have passed a night in a South American forest have
been roused from their slumbers by a _matinée musicale_ more fantastic
than melodious, performed by monkeys, as their ordinary greeting of the
dawn. The yelling, chattering, screeching, howling, all unite to form a
chorus almost unearthly in its hideousness.

Amongst the various specimens of the numerous family of the quadrumana
ought to be recognized the little marikina; the sagouin, with its
parti-coloured face; the grey mora, the skin of which is used by the
Indians for covering their gun-locks; the sapajou, with its singular
tuft over the forehead, and, most remarkable of all, the guariba
(_Simia Beelzebul_) with its prehensile tail and diabolical countenance.

At the first streak of daylight the senior member, as choragus, will
start the key-note in a sonorous barytone, the younger monkeys join in
tenor and alto, and the concert begins. But this morning there was no
concert at all. There was nothing of the wonted serenade to break the
silence of the forest. The shrill notes resulting from the rapid
vibration of the hyoid bones of the throat were not to be heard.
Indians would have been disappointed and perplexed; they are very fond
of the flesh of the guariba when smoked and dried, and they would
certainly have missed the chant of the monkey "paternosters;" but Dick
Sands and his companions were unfamiliar with any of these things, and
accordingly the singular quietude was to them a matter of no surprise.

They all awoke much refreshed by their night's rest, which there had
been nothing to disturb. Jack was by no means the latest in opening his
eyes, and his first words were addressed to Hercules, asking him
whether he had caught a wolf with his teeth. Hercules had to
acknowledge that he had tasted nothing all night, and declared himself
quite ready for breakfast. The whole party were unanimous in this
respect, and after a brief morning prayer, breakfast was expeditiously
served by old Nan. The meal was but a repetition of the last evening's
supper, but with their appetites sharpened by the fresh forest air, and
anxious to fortify themselves for a good day's march, they did not fail
to do ample justice to their simple fare. Even Cousin Benedict, for
once in his life at least, partook of his food as if it were not
utterly a matter of indifference to him; but he grumbled very much at
the restraint to which he considered himself subjected; he could not
see the good of coming to such a country as this, if he were to be
obliged to walk about with his hands in his pockets; and he protested
that if Hercules did not leave him alone and permit him to catch
fire-flies, there would be a bone to pick between them. Hercules did
not look very much alarmed at the threat. Mrs. Weldon, however, took
him aside, and telling him that she did not wish to deprive the
enthusiast entirely of his favourite occupation, instructed him to
allow her cousin as much liberty as possible, provided he did not lose
sight of him.

The morning meal was over, and it was only seven o'clock when the
travellers were once more on their way towards the east, preserving the
same marching-order as on the day before.

The path was still through luxuriant forest. The vegetable kingdom
reigned supreme. As the plateau was immediately adjacent to tropical
latitudes, the sun's rays during the summer months descended
perpendicularly upon the virgin soil, and the vast amount of heat thus
obtained combined with the abundant moisture retained in the subsoil,
caused vegetation to assume a character which was truly magnificent.

Dick Sands could not overcome a certain sense of mystification. Here
they were, as Harris told them, in the region of the pampas, a word
which he knew in the Quichna dialect signifies "a plain;" but he had
always read that these plains were characterized by a deficiency alike
of water, of trees, and rocks; he had always understood that during the
rainy season, thistles spring up in great abundance and grow until they
form thickets that are well-nigh impenetrable; he had imagined that the
few dwarf trees and prickly shrubs that exist during the summer only
stamp the general scene with an aspect of yet more thorough bareness
and desolation. But how different was everything to all this! The
forest never ceased to stretch away interminably to the horizon. There
were no tokens of the rough nakedness that he had expected. Dick seemed
to be driven to the conclusion that Harris was right in describing this
plateau of Atacama, which he had for his part most firmly believed to
be a vast desert between the Andes and the Pacific, as a region that
was quite exceptional in its natural features.

It was not in Dick's character to keep his reflections to himself. In
the course of the morning he expressed his extreme surprise at finding
the pampas answer so little to his preconceived ideas.

"Have I not understood correctly," he said, "that the pampas is similar
to the North American savannahs, only less marshy?"

Harris replied that such was indeed a correct description of the pampas
of Rio Colorado, and the Ilanos of Venezuela and the Orinoco.

"But," he continued, "I own I am as much astonished as yourself at the
character of this region; I have never crossed the plateau before, and
I must confess it is altogether different to what you find beyond the
Andes towards the Atlantic."

"You don't mean that we are going to cross the Andes?" said Dick, in
sudden alarm.

Harris smiled.

"No, no, indeed. With our limited means of transport such an
undertaking would have been rash in the extreme. We had better have
kept to the coast for ever rather than incur such a risk. Our
destination, San Felice, is on this side of the range, and in order to
reach it, we shall not have to leave the plateau, of which the greatest
elevation is but little over 1500 feet."

"And you say," Dick persisted, "that you have really no fear of losing
your way in a forest such as this, a forest into which you have never
set foot before?"

"No fear whatever," Harris answered; "so accustomed am I to travelling
of this kind, that I can steer my way by a thousand signs revealing
themselves in the growth of the trees, and in the composition of the
soil, which would never present themselves to your notice. I assure you
that I anticipate no difficulties."

This conversation was not heard by any of the rest of the party. Harris
seemed to speak as frankly as he did fearlessly, and Dick felt that
there might be, after all, no just grounds for any of his own
misgivings.

Five days passed by, and the 12th of April arrived without any special
incident. Nine miles had been the average distance accomplished in a
day; regular periods of rest had been taken, and, except that Jack's
spirits had somewhat flagged, the fatigue did not seem to have
interfered with the general good health of the travellers.

First disappointed of his India-rubber-tree, and then of his humming
birds, Jack had inquired about the beautiful parrots which he had been
led to expect he should see in this wonderful forest. Where were the
bright green macaws? where were the gaudy aras with their bare white
cheeks and pointed tails, which seem never to light upon the ground?
and where, too, were all the brilliant parroquets, with their feathered
faces, and indeed the whole variety of those forest chatterers of which
the Indians affirm that they speak the language of nations long extinct?

It is true that there was no lack of the common grey parrots with
crimson tails, but these were no novelty; Jack had seen plenty of them
before, for owing to their reputation of being the most clever in
mimickry of the Psittacidæ, they have been domesticated everywhere in
both the Old and New worlds.

[Illustration: "Don't Fire!"]

But Jack's dissatisfaction was nothing compared to Cousin Benedict's.
In spite of being allowed to wander away from the rank, he had failed
to discover a single insect which was worth the pursuit; not even a
fire-fly danced at night; nature seemed to be mocking him, and his
ill-humour increased accordingly.

In this way the journey was continued for four days longer, and on the
16th it was estimated that they must have travelled between eighty and
ninety miles north-eastwards from the coast. Harris positively asserted
that they could not be much more than twenty miles from San Felice, and
that by pushing forwards they might expect in eight-and-forty hours to
find themselves lodged in comfortable quarters.

But although they had thus succeeded in traversing this vast
table-land, they had not seen one human inhabitant. Dick was more than
ever perplexed, and it was a subject of bitter regret to him that they
had not stranded upon some more frequented part of the shore, near some
village or plantation where Mrs. Weldon might long since have found a
suitable refuge.

Deserted, however, as the country apparently was by man, it had
latterly shown itself much more abundantly tenanted by animals. Many a
time a long, plaintive cry was heard, which Harris attributed to the
tardigrades or sloths often found in wooded districts, and known by the
name of "ais;" and in the middle of the dinner-halt on this day, a loud
hissing suddenly broke upon the air which made Mrs. Weldon start to her
feet in alarm.

"A serpent!" cried Dick, catching up his loaded gun.

The negroes, following Dick's example, were in a moment on the alert.

"Don't fire!" cried Harris.

There was indeed nothing improbable in the supposition that a "sucuru,"
a species of boa, sometimes measuring forty feet in length, had just
moved itself in the long grass at their side, but Harris affirmed that
the "sucuru" never hisses, and declared that the noise had really come
from animals of an entirely inoffensive character.

"What animals?" asked Dick, always eager for information, which it must
be granted Harris seemed always equally anxious to give.

"Antelopes," replied Harris; "but, hush! not a sound, or you will
frighten them away."

"Antelopes!" cried Dick; "I must see them; I must get close to them."

"More easily said than done," answered Harris, shaking his head; but
Dick was not to be diverted from his purpose, and, gun in hand, crept
into the grass. He had not advanced many yards before a herd of about a
dozen gazelles, graceful in body, with short, pointed horns, dashed
past him like a glowing cloud, and disappeared in the underwood without
giving him time to take a shot.

"I told you beforehand what you would have to expect," said Harris, as
Dick, with a considerable sense of disappointment, returned to the
party.

Impossible, however, as it had been fairly to scrutinize the antelopes,
such was hardly the case with another herd of animals, the
identification of which led to a somewhat singular discussion between
Harris and the rest.

About four o'clock on the afternoon of the same day, the travellers
were halting for a few moments near an opening in the forest, when
three or four large animals emerged from a thicket about a hundred
paces ahead, and scampered off at full speed. In spite of what Harris
had urged, Dick put his gun to his shoulder, and was on the very point
of firing, when Harris knocked the rifle quickly aside.

"They were giraffes!" shouted Dick.

The announcement awakened the curiosity of Jack, who quickly scrambled
to his feet upon the saddle on which he was lounging.

"My dear Dick," said Mrs. Weldon, "there are no giraffes in America!"

[Illustration: A herd of gazelles dashed past him like a glowing cloud.]

"Certainly not," cried Harris; "they were not giraffes, they were
ostriches which you saw!"

"Ostriches with four legs! that will never do! what do you say. Mrs.
Weldon?"

Mrs. Weldon replied that she had certainly taken the animals for
quadrupeds, and all the negroes were under the same impression.

Laughing heartily, Harris said it was far from an uncommon thing for an
inexperienced eye to mistake a large ostrich for a small giraffe; the
shape of both was so similar, that it often quite escaped observation
as to whether the long necks terminated in a beak or a muzzle; besides,
what need of discussion could there be when the fact was established
that giraffes are unknown in the New World? The reasoning was plausible
enough, and Mrs Weldon and the negroes were soon convinced. But Dick
was far from satisfied.

"I did not know that there was an American ostrich!" he again objected.

"Oh, yes," replied Harris promptly, "there is a species called the
nandu, which is very well known here; we shall probably see some more
of them."

The statement was correct; the nandu is common in the plains of South
America, and is distinguished from the African ostrich by having three
toes, all furnished with claws. It is a fine bird, sometimes exceeding
six feet in height; it has a short beak, and its wings are furnished
with blue-grey plumes. Harris appeared well acquainted with the bird,
and proceeded to give a very precise account of its habits. In
concluding his remarks, he again pressed upon Dick his most urgent
request that he should abstain from firing upon any animal whatever. It
was of the utmost consequence.

Dick made no reply. He was silent and thoughtful. Grave doubts had
arisen in his mind, and he could neither explain nor dispel them.

When the march was resumed on the following day, Harris asserted his
conviction that another four-and-twenty hours would bring them to the
hacienda.

"And there, madam," he said, addressing Mrs. Weldon, "we can offer you
every essential comfort, though you may not find the luxuries of your
own home in San Francisco."

Mrs. Weldon repeated her expression of gratitude for the proffered
hospitality, owning that she should now be exceedingly glad to reach
the farm, as she was anxious about her little son, who appeared to be
threatened with the symptoms of incipient fever.

Harris could not deny that although the climate was usually very
healthy, it nevertheless did occasionally produce a kind of
intermittent fever during March and April.

"But nature has provided the proper remedy," said Dick; and perceiving
that Harris did not comprehend his meaning, he continued, "Are we not
in the region of the quinquinas, the bark of which is notoriously the
medicine with which attacks of fever are usually treated? for my part,
I am amazed that we have not seen numbers of them already."

"Ah! yes, yes; I know what you mean," answered Harris, after a moment's
hesitation; "they are trees, however, not always easy to find; they
rarely grow in groups, and in spite of their large leaves and fragrant
red blossom, the Indians themselves often have a difficulty in
recognizing them; the feature that distinguishes them most is their
evergreen foliage."

At Mrs. Weldon's request, Harris promised to point out the tree if he
should see one, but added that when she reached the hacienda, she would
be able to obtain some sulphate of quinine, which was much more
efficacious than the unprepared bark.[1]


[Footnote 1: This bark was formerly, reduced to powder, known as
"Pulvis Jesuiticus," because in the year 1649 the Jesuits in Rome
imported a large quantity of it from their missionaries in South
America.]


The day passed without further incident. No rain had fallen at present,
though the warm mist that rose from the soil betokened an approaching
change of weather; the rainy season was certainly not far distant, but
to travellers who indulged the expectation of being in a few hours in a
place of shelter, this was not a matter of great concern.

[Illustration: A halt was made for the night beneath a grove of lofty
trees.]

Evening came, and a halt was made for the night beneath a grove of
lofty trees. If Harris had not miscalculated, they could hardly be more
than about six miles from their destination; so confirmed, however, was
Dick Sands in his strange suspicions, that nothing could induce him to
relax any of the usual precautions, and he particularly insisted upon
the negroes, turn by turn, keeping up the accustomed watch.

Worn out by fatigue, the little party were glad to lie down, but they
had scarcely dropped off to sleep when they were aroused by a sharp cry.

"Who's that? who's there? what's the matter?" exclaimed Dick, the first
to rise to his feet.

"It is I," answered Benedict's voice; "I am bitten. Something has
bitten me."

"A snake!" exclaimed Mrs. Weldon in alarm.

"No, no, cousin, better than that! it was not a snake; I believe it was
an orthoptera; I have it all right," he shouted triumphantly.

"Then kill it quickly, sir; and let us go to sleep again in peace,"
said Harris.

"Kill it! not for the world! I must have a light, and look at it!"

Dick Sands indulged him, for reasons of his own, in getting a light.
The entomologist carefully opened his hand and displayed an insect
somewhat smaller than a bee, of a dull colour, streaked with yellow on
the under portion of the body. He looked radiant with delight.

"A diptera!" he exclaimed, half beside himself with joy, "a most famous
diptera!"

"Is it venomous?" asked Mrs. Weldon.

"Not at all to men; it only hurts elephants and buffaloes."

"But tell us its name! what is it?" cried Dick impetuously.

The naturalist began to speak in a slow, oracular tone.

"This insect is here a prodigy; it is an insect totally unknown in this
country,--in America."

"Tell us its name!" roared Dick.

"It is a tzetzy, sir, a true tzetzy."

Dick's heart sank like a stone. He was speechless. He did not, dared
not, ask more. Only too well he knew where the tzetzy could alone be
found. He did not close his eyes again that night.




CHAPTER XVIII.

A TERRIBLE DISCOVERY.


The morning of the 18th dawned, the day on which, according to Harris's
prediction, the travellers were to be safely housed at San Felice. Mrs.
Weldon was really much relieved at the prospect, for she was aware that
her strength must prove inadequate to the strain of a more protracted
journey. The condition of her little boy, who was alternately flushed
with fever, and pale with exhaustion, had begun to cause her great
anxiety, and unwilling to resign the care of the child even to Nan his
faithful nurse, she insisted upon carrying him in her own arms. Twelve
days and nights, passed in the open air, had done much to try her
powers of endurance, and the charge of a sick child in addition would
soon break down her strength entirely.

Dick Sands, Nan, and the negroes had all borne the march very fairly.
Their stock of provisions, though of course considerably diminished,
was still far from small. As for Harris, he had shown himself
pre-eminently adapted for forest-life, and capable of bearing any
amount of fatigue. Yet, strange to say, as he approached the end of the
journey, his manner underwent a remarkable change; instead of
conversing in his ordinary frank and easy way, he became silent and
preoccupied, as if engrossed in his own thoughts. Perhaps he had an
instinctive consciousness that "his young friend," as he was in the
habit of addressing Dick, was entertaining hard suspicions about him.

The march was resumed. The trees once again ceased to be crowded in
impenetrable masses, but stood in clusters at considerable distances
apart. Now, Dick tried to argue with himself, they must be coming to
the true pampas, or the man must be designedly misleading them; and yet
what motive could he have?

Although during the earlier part of the day there occurred nothing that
could be said absolutely to justify Dick's increasing uneasiness, two
circumstances transpired which did not escape his observation, and
which, he felt, might be significant. The first of these was a sudden
change in Dingo's behaviour. The dog, throughout the march, had
uniformly run along with his nose upon the ground, smelling the grass
and shrubs, and occasionally uttering a sad low whine; but to-day he
seemed all agitation; he scampered about with bristling coat, with his
head erect, and ever and again burst into one of those furious fits of
barking, with which he had formerly been accustomed to greet Negoro's
appearance upon the deck of the "Pilgrim."

The idea that flitted across Dick's mind was shared by Tom.

"Look, Mr. Dick, look at Dingo; he is at his old ways again," said he;
"it is just as if Negoro...."

"Hush!" said Dick to the old man, who continued in a lower voice,--

"It is just as if Negoro had followed us; do you think it is likely?"

"It might perhaps be to his advantage to follow us, if he doesn't know
the country; but if he does know the country, why then...."

Dick did not finish his sentence, but whistled to Dingo. The dog
reluctantly obeyed the call.

As soon as the dog was at his side, Dick patted him, repeating,--

"Good dog! good Dingo! where's Negoro?"

The sound of Negoro's name had its usual effect; it seemed to irritate
the animal exceedingly, and he barked furiously, and apparently wanted
to dash into the thicket.

Harris had been an interested spectator of the scene, and now
approached with a peculiar expression on his countenance, and inquired
what they were saying to Dingo.

"Oh, nothing much," replied Tom; "we were only asking him for news of a
lost acquaintance."

"Ah, I suppose you mean that Portuguese cook of yours."

"Yes," answered Tom; "we fancied from Dingo's behaviour, that Negoro
must be somewhere close at hand."

"Why don't you send and search the underwood? perhaps the poor wretch
is in distress."

"No need of that, Mr. Harris; Negoro, I have no doubt, is quite capable
of taking care of himself."

"Well, just as you please, my young friend," said Harris, with an air
of indifference.

Dick turned away; he continued his endeavours to pacify Dingo, and the
conversation dropped.

The other thing that had arrested Dick's attention was the behaviour of
the horse. If they had been as near the hacienda as Harris described,
would not the animal have pricked up its ears, sniffed the air, and
with dilated nostril, exhibited some sign of satisfaction, as being
upon familiar ground?

But nothing of the kind was to be observed; the horse plodded along as
unconcernedly as if a stable were as far away as ever.

Even Mrs. Weldon was not so engrossed with her child, but what she was
fain to express her wonder at the deserted aspect of the country. No
trace of a farm-labourer was anywhere to be seen! She cast her eye at
Harris, who was in his usual place in front, and observing how he was
looking first to the left, and then to the right, with the air of a man
who was uncertain of his path, she asked herself whether it was
possible their guide might have lost his way. She dared not entertain
the idea, and averted her eyes, that she might not be harassed by his
movements.

After crossing an open plain about a mile in width, the travellers once
again entered the forest, which resumed something of the same denseness
that had characterized it farther to the west. In the course of the
afternoon, they came to a spot which was marked very distinctly by the
vestiges of some enormous animals, which must have passed quite
recently. As Dick looked carefully about him, he observed that the
branches were all torn off or broken to a considerable height, and that
the foot-tracks in the trampled grass were much too large to be those
either of jaguars or panthers. Even if it were possible that the prints
on the ground had been made by ais or other taidigrades, this would
fail to account in the least for the trees being broken to such a
height. Elephants alone were capable of working such destruction in the
underwood, but elephants were unknown in America. Dick was puzzled, but
controlled himself so that he would not apply to Harris for any
enlightenment; his intuition made him aware that a man who had once
tried to make him believe that giraffes were ostriches, would not
hesitate a second time to impose upon his credulity.

More than ever was Dick becoming convinced that Harris was a traitor,
and he was secretly prompted to tax him with his treachery. Still he
was obliged to own that he could not assign any motive for the man
acting in such a manner with the survivors of the "Pilgrim," and
consequently hesitated before he actually condemned him for conduct so
base and heartless. What could be done? he repeatedly asked himself. On
board ship the boy captain might perchance have been able to devise
some plan for the safety of those so strangely committed to his charge,
but here on an unknown shore, he could only suffer from the burden of
this responsibility the more, because he was so utterly powerless to
act.

He made up his mind on one point. He determined not to alarm the poor
anxious mother a moment before he was actually compelled. It was his
carrying out this determination that explained why on subsequently
arriving at a considerable stream, where he saw some huge heads,
swollen muzzles, long tusks and unwieldy bodies rising from amidst the
rank wet grass, he uttered no word and gave no gesture of surprise; but
only too well he knew, at a glance, that he must be looking at a herd
of hippopotamuses.

[Illustration: "Look here! here are hands, men's hands."]

It was a weary march that day; a general feeling of depression spread
involuntarily from one to another; hardly conscious to herself of her
weariness, Mrs. Weldon was exhibiting manifest symptoms of lassitude;
and it was only Dick's moral energy and sense of duty that kept him
from succumbing to the prevailing dejection.

About four o'clock, Tom noticed something lying in the grass, and
stooping down he picked up a kind of knife; it was of peculiar shape,
being very wide and flat in the blade, while its handle, which was of
ivory, was ornamented with a good deal of clumsy carving. He carried it
at once to Dick, who, when he had scrutinized it, held it up to Harris,
with the remark,--

"There must be natives not far off."

"Quite right, my young friend; the hacienda must be a very few miles
away,--but yet, but yet...."

He hesitated.

"You don't mean that you are not sure of your way," said Dick sharply.

"Not exactly that," replied Harris; "yet in taking this short cut
across the forest, I am inclined to think I am a mile or so out of the
way. Perhaps I had better walk on a little way, and look about me."

"No; you do not leave us here," cried Dick firmly.

"Not against your will; but remember, I do not undertake to guide you
in the dark."

"We must spare you the necessity for that. I can answer for it that
Mrs. Weldon will raise no objection to spending another night in the
open air. We can start off to-morrow morning as early as we like, and
if the distance be only what you represent, a few hours will easily
accomplish it."

"As you please," answered Harris with cold civility.

Just then, Dingo again burst out into a vehement fit of barking, and it
required no small amount of coaxing on Dick's part to make him cease
from his noise.

It was decided that the halt should be made at once. Mrs. Weldon, as it
had been anticipated, urged nothing against it, being preoccupied by
her immediate attentions to Jack, who was lying in her arms, suffering
from a decided attack of fever. The shelter of a large thicket had just
been selected by Dick as a suitable resting-place for the night, when
Tom, who was assisting in the necessary preparations, suddenly gave a
cry of horror.

"What is it, Tom?" asked Dick very calmly.

"Look! look at these trees! they are spattered with blood! and look
here! here are hands, men's hands, cut off and lying on the ground!"

"What?" cried Dick, and in an instant was at his side.

His presence of mind did not fail him; he whispered,--

"Hush! Tom! hush! not a word!"

But it was with a shudder that ran through his veins that he witnessed
for himself the mutilated fragments of several human bodies, and saw,
lying beside them, some broken forks, and some bits of iron chain.

The sight of the gory remains made Dingo bark ferociously, and Dick,
who was most anxious that Mrs. Weldon's attention should not be called
to the discovery, had the greatest difficulty in driving him back; but
fortunately the lady's mind was so engrossed with her patient, that she
did not observe the commotion. Harris stood aloof; there was no one to
notice the change that passed over his countenance, but the expression
was almost diabolical in its malignity.

Poor old Tom himself seemed perfectly spell-bound. With his hands
clenched, his eyes dilated, and his breast heaving with emotion, he
kept repeating without anything like coherence, the words,--

"Forks! chains! forks! ... long ago ... remember ... too well ...
chains!"

"For Mrs. Weldon's sake, Tom, hold your tongue!" Dick implored him.

Tom, however, was full with some remembrance of the past; he continued
to repeat,--

"Long ago ... forks ... chains!" until Dick led him out of hearing.

A fresh halting-place was chosen a short distance further on, and
supper was prepared. But the meal was left almost untasted; not so much
that hunger had been overcome by fatigue, but because the indefinable
feeling of uneasiness, that had taken possession of them all, had
entirely destroyed all appetite.

[Illustration: The man was gone, and his horse with him.]

Gradually the night became very dark. The sky was covered with heavy
storm-clouds, and on the western horizon flashes of summer lightning
now and then glimmered through the trees. The air was perfectly still;
not a leaf stirred, and the atmosphere seemed so charged with
electricity as to be incapable of transmitting sound of any kind.

Dick, himself, with Austin and Bat in attendance, remained on guard,
all of them eagerly straining both eye and ear to catch any light or
sound that might disturb the silence and obscurity. Old Tom, with his
head sunk upon his breast, sat motionless, as in a trance; he was
gloomily revolving the awakened memories of the past. Mrs. Weldon was
engaged with her sick child. Scarcely one of the party was really
asleep, except indeed it might be Cousin Benedict, whose reasoning
faculties were not of an order to carry him forwards into any future
contingencies.

Midnight was still an hour in advance, when the dull air seemed filled
with a deep and prolonged roar, mingled with a peculiar kind of
vibration.

Tom started to his feet. A fresh recollection of his early days had
struck him.

"A lion! a lion!" he shouted.

In vain Dick tried to repress him; but he repeated,--

"A lion! a lion!"

Dick Sands seized his cutlass, and, unable any longer to control his
wrath, he rushed to the spot where he had left Harris lying.

The man was gone, and his horse with him!

All the suspicions that had been so long pent up within Dick's mind now
shaped themselves into actual reality. A flood of light had broken in
upon him. Now he was convinced, only too certainly, that it was not the
coast of America at all upon which the schooner had been cast ashore!
it was not Easter Island that had been sighted far away in the west!
the compass had completely deceived him; he was satisfied now that the
strong currents had carried them quite round Cape Horn, and that they
had really entered the Atlantic. No wonder that quinquinas, caoutchouc,
and other South American products, had failed to be seen. This was
neither the Bolivian pampas nor the plateau of Atacama. They were
giraffes, not ostriches, that had vanished down the glade; they were
elephants that had trodden down the underwood; they were hippopotamuses
that were lurking by the river; it was indeed the dreaded tzetsy that
Cousin Benedict had so triumphantly discovered; and, last of all, it
was a lion's roar that had disturbed the silence of the forest. That
chain, that knife, those forks, were unquestionably the instruments of
slave-dealers; and what could those mutilated hands be, except the
relics of their ill-fated victims?

Harris and Negoro must be in a conspiracy!

It was with terrible anguish that Dick gnashed his teeth and muttered,--

"Yes, it is too true; we are in Africa! in equatorial Africa! in the
land of slavery! in the very haunt of slave-drivers!"



END OF FIRST PART.



*****



PART THE SECOND.


[Illustration: WEST COAST OF CENTRAL AFRICA.]


CHAPTER I.

THE DARK CONTINENT.


The "slave-trade" is an expression that ought never to have found its
way into any human language. After being long practised at a large
profit by such European nations as had possessions beyond the seas,
this abominable traffic has now for many years been ostensibly
forbidden; yet even in the enlightenment of this nineteenth century, it
is still largely carried on, especially in Central Africa, inasmuch as
there are several states, professedly Christian, whose signatures have
never been affixed to the deed of abolition.

Incredible as it should seem, this barter of human beings still exists,
and for the due comprehension of the second part of Dick Sands' story
it must be borne in mind, that for the purpose of supplying certain
colonies with slaves, there continue to be prosecuted such barbarous
"man-hunts" as threaten almost to lay waste an entire continent with
blood, fire, and pillage.

The nefarious traffic as far as regards negroes does not appear to have
arisen until the fifteenth century. The following are said to be the
circumstances under which it had its origin. After being banished from
Spain, the Mussulmans crossed the straits of Gibraltar and took refuge
upon the shores of Africa, but the Portuguese who then occupied that
portion of the coast persecuted the fugitives with the utmost severity,
and having captured them in large numbers, sent them as prisoners into
Portugal. They were thus the first nucleus of any African slaves that
entered Western Europe since the commencement of the Christian era. The
majority, however, of these Mussulmans were members of wealthy
families, who were prepared to pay almost any amount of money for their
release; but no ransom was exorbitant enough to tempt the Portuguese to
surrender them; more precious than gold were the strong arms that
should work the resources of their young and rising colonies. Thus
baulked in their purpose of effecting a direct ransom of their captured
relatives, the Mussulman families next submitted a proposition for
exchanging them for a larger number of African negroes, whom it would
be quite easy to procure. The Portuguese, to whom the proposal was in
every way advantageous, eagerly accepted the offer; and in this way the
slave-trade was originated in Europe.

By the end of the sixteenth century this odious traffic had become
permanently established; in principle it contained nothing repugnant to
the semi-barbarous thought and customs then existing; all the great
states recognized it as the most effectual means of colonizing the
islands of the New World, especially as slaves of negro blood, well
acclimatized to tropical heat, were able to survive where white men
must have perished by thousands. The transport of slaves to the
American colonies was consequently regularly effected by vessels
specially built for that purpose, and large dépôts for this branch of
commerce were established at various points of the African coast. The
"goods" cost comparatively little in production, and the profits were
enormous.

Yet, after all, however indispensable it might be to complete the
foundation of the trans-atlantic colonies, there was nothing to justify
this shameful barter of human flesh and blood, and the voice of
philanthropy began to be heard in protestation, calling upon all
European governments, in the name of mercy and common humanity, to
decree the abolition of the trade at once.

In 1751, the Quakers put themselves at the head of the abolitionist
movement in North America, that very land where, a hundred years later,
the war of secession burst forth, in which the question of slavery bore
the most conspicuous part. Several of the Northern States, Virginia,
Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania prohibited the trade,
liberating the slaves, in spite of the cost, who had been imported into
their territories.

The campaign, thus commenced, was not limited to a few provinces of the
New World; on this side of the Atlantic, too, the partisans of slavery
were subject to a vigourous attack. England and France led the van, and
energetically beat up recruits to serve the righteous cause. "Let us
lose our colonies rather than sacrifice our principles," was the
magnanimous watchword that resounded throughout Europe, and
notwithstanding the vast political and commercial interests involved in
the question, it did not go forth in vain. A living impulse had been
communicated to the liberation-movement. In 1807, England formally
prohibited the slave-trade in her colonies; France following her
example in 1814. The two great nations then entered upon a treaty on
the subject, which was confirmed by Napoleon during the Hundred Days.

Hitherto, however, the declaration was purely theoretical. Slave-ships
continued to ply their illicit trade, discharging their living cargo at
many a colonial port. It was evident that more resolute and practical
measures must be taken to impress the enormity. Accordingly the United
States in 1820, and Great Britain in 1824, declared the slave-trade to
be an act of piracy and its perpetrators to be punishable with death.
France soon gave in her adherence to the new treaty, but the Southern
States of America, and the Spanish and Portuguese, not having signed
the act of abolition, continued the importation of slaves at a great
profit, and this in defiance of the recognized reciprocal right of
visitation to verify the flags of suspected ships.

But although the slave-trade by these measures was in a considerable
measure reduced, it continued to exist; new slaves were not allowed,
but the old ones did not recover their liberty. England was now the
first to set a noble example. On the 14th of May, 1833, an Act of
Parliament, by a munificent vote of millions of pounds, emancipated all
the negroes in the British Colonies, and in August, 1838, 670,000
slaves were declared free men. Ten years later, in 1848, the French
Republic liberated the slaves in her colonies to the number of 260,000,
and in 1859 the war which broke out between the Federals and
Confederates in the United States finished the work of emancipation by
extending it to the whole of North America.

Thus, three great powers have accomplished their task of humanity, and
at the present time the slave-trade is carried on only for the
advantage of the Spanish and Portuguese colonies, or to supply the
requirements of the Turkish or Arab populations of the East. Brazil,
although she has not emancipated her former slaves, does not receive
any new, and all negro children are pronounced free-born.

In contrast, however, to all this, it is not to be concealed that, in
the interior of Africa, as the result of wars between chieftains waged
for the sole object of making captives, entire tribes are often reduced
to slavery, and are carried off in caravans in two opposite directions,
some westwards to the Portuguese colony of Angola, others eastwards to
Mozambique. Of these miserable creatures, of whom a very small
proportion ever reach their destination, some are despatched to Cuba or
Madagascar, others to the Arab or Turkish provinces of Asia, to Mecca
or Muscat. The French and English cruisers have practically very little
power to control the iniquitous proceedings, because the extent of
coast to be watched is so large that a strict and adequate surveillance
cannot be maintained. The extent of the odious export is very
considerable; no less than 24,000 slaves annually reach the coast, a
number that hardly represents a tenth part of those who are massacred
or otherwise perish by a deplorable end. After the frightful
butcheries, the fields lie devastated, the smouldering villages are
void of inhabitants, the rivers reek with bleeding corpses, and wild
beasts take undisputed possession of the soil. Livingstone, upon
returning to a district, immediately after one of these ruthless raids,
said that he could never have recognized it for the same that he had
visited only a few months previously; and all other travellers, Grant,
Speke, Burton, Cameron, Stanley, describe the wooded plateau of Central
Africa as the principal theatre of the barbarous warfare between chief
and chief. In the region of the great lakes, throughout the vast
district which feeds the market of Zanzibar, in Bornu and Fezzan,
further south on the banks of the Nyassa and Zambesi, further west in
the districts of the Upper Zaire, just traversed by the intrepid
Stanley, everywhere there is the recurrence of the same scenes of ruin,
slaughter, and devastation. Ever and again the question seems to be
forced upon the mind whether slavery is not to end in the entire
annihilation of the negro race, so that, like the Australian tribes of
South Holland, it will become extinct. Who can doubt that the day must
dawn which will herald the closing of the markets in the Spanish and
Portuguese colonies, a day when civilized nations shall no longer
tolerate the perpetration of this barbarous wrong?

It is hardly too much to say that another year ought to witness the
emancipation of every slave in the possession of Christian states. It
seems only too likely that for years to come the Mussulman nations will
continue to depopulate the continent of Africa; to them is due the
chief emigration of the natives, who, torn from their provinces, are
sent to the eastern coast in numbers that exceed 40,000 annually. Long
before the Egyptian expedition the natives of Sennaar were sold to the
natives of Darfur and _vice versa_; and even Napoleon Buonaparte
purchased a considerable number of negroes, whom he organized into
regiments after the fashion of the mamelukes. Altogether it may be
affirmed, that although four-fifths of the present century have passed
away, slave-traffic in Africa has been increased rather than diminished.

The truth is that Islamism really nurtures the slave-trade. In
Mussulman provinces, the black slave has taken the place of the white
slave of former times; dealers of the most questionable character bear
their part in the execrable business, bringing a supplementary
population to races which, unregenerated by their own labour, would
otherwise diminish and ultimately disappear.

As in the time of Buonaparte, these slaves often become soldiers; on
the Upper Niger, for instance, they still form half the army of certain
chieftains, under circumstances in which their lot is hardly, if at
all, inferior to that of free men. Elsewhere, where the slave is not a
soldier, he counts merely as current coin; and in Bornu and even in
Egypt, we are told by William Lejean, an eye-witness, that officers and
other functionaries have received their pay in this form.

Such, then, appears to be the present actual condition of the
slave-trade; and it is stern justice that compels the additional
statement that there are representatives of certain great European
powers who still favour the unholy traffic with an indulgent
connivance, and whilst cruisers are watching the coasts of the Atlantic
and of the Indian Ocean, kidnapping goes on regularly in the interior,
caravans pass along under the very eyes of certain officials, and
massacres are perpetrated in which frequently ten negroes are
sacrificed in the capture of a single slave.

It was the knowledge, more or less complete, of all this, that wrung
from Dick Sands his bitter and heart-rending cry:--

"We are in Africa! in the very haunt of slave-drivers!"

Too true it was that he found himself and his companions in a land
fraught with such frightful peril. He could only tremble when he
wondered on what part of the fatal continent the "Pilgrim" had
stranded. Evidently it was at some point of the west coast, and he had
every reason to fear that it was on the shores of Angola, the
rendezvous for all the caravans that journey in that portion of Africa.

His conjecture was correct; he really was in the very country that a
few years later and with gigantic effort was to be traversed by Cameron
in the south and Stanley in the north. Of the vast territory, with its
three provinces, Congo, Angola, and Benguela, little was then known
except the coast. It extends from the Zaire on the north to the Nourse
on the south, and its chief towns are the ports of Benguela and of St.
Paul de Loanda, the capital of the colony, which is a dependency of the
kingdom of Portugal. The interior of the country had been almost
entirely unexplored. Very few were the travellers who had cared to
venture far inland, for an unhealthy climate, a hot, damp soil
conducive to fever, a permanent warfare between the native tribes, some
of which are cannibals, and the ill-feeling of the slave-dealers
against any stranger who might endeavour to discover the secrets of
their infamous craft, all combine to render the region one of the most
hazardous in the whole of Equatorial Africa.

It was in 1816 that Tuckey ascended the Congo as far as the Yellala
Falls, a distance not exceeding 203 miles; but the journey was too
short to give an accurate idea of the interior of the country, and
moreover cost the lives of nearly all the officers and scientific men
connected with the expedition.

Thirty-seven years afterwards, Dr. Livingstone had advanced from the
Cape of Good Hope to the Upper Zambesi; thence, with a fearlessness
hitherto unrivalled, he crossed the Coango, an affluent of the Congo,
and after having traversed the continent from the extreme south to the
east he reached St. Paul de Loanda on the 31st of May, 1854, the first
explorer of the unknown portions of the great Portuguese colony.

Eighteen years elapsed, and two other bold travellers crossed the
entire continent from east to west, and after encountering unparalleled
difficulties, emerged, the one to the south, the other to the north of
Angola.

The first of these was Verney Lovett Cameron, a lieutenant in the
British navy. In 1872, when serious doubts were entertained as to the
safety of the expedition sent out under Stanley to the relief of
Livingstone in the great lake district, Lieutenant Cameron volunteered
to go out in search of the noble missionary explorer. His offer was
accepted, and accompanied by Dr. Dillon, Lieutenant Cecil Murphy, and
Robert Moffat, a nephew of Livingstone, he started from Zanzibar.
Having passed through Ugogo, he met Livingstone's corpse, which was
being borne to the eastern coast by his faithful followers. Unshaken in
his resolve to make his way right across the continent, Cameron still
pushed onwards to the west. He passed through Unyanyembe and Uganda,
and reached Kawele, where he secured all Livingstone's papers. After
exploring Lake Tanganyika he crossed the mountains of Bambarre, and
finding himself unable to descend the course of the Lualaba, he
traversed the provinces devastated and depopulated by war and the
slave-trade, Kilemba, Urua, the sources of the Lomami, Ulanda, and
Lovalé, and having crossed the Coanza, he sighted the Atlantic and
reached the port of St. Philip de Benguela, after a journey that had
occupied three years and five months. Cameron's two companions, Dr.
Dillon and Robert Moffat, both succumbed to the hardships of the
expedition.

The intrepid Englishman was soon to be followed into the field by an
American, Mr. Henry Moreland Stanley. It is universally known how the
undaunted correspondent of the _New York Herald_, having been
despatched in search of Livingstone, found the veteran missionary at
Ujiji, on the borders of Lake Tanganyika, on the 31st of October, 1871.
But what he had undertaken in the course of humanity Stanley longed to
continue in the interests of science, his prime object being to make a
thorough investigation of the Lualaba, of which, in his first
expedition, he had only been able to get a partial and imperfect
survey. Accordingly, whilst Cameron was still deep in the provinces of
Central Africa, Stanley started from Bagamoyo in November, 1874.
Twenty-one months later he quitted Ujiji, which had been decimated by
small-pox, and in seventy-four days accomplished the passage of the
lake and reached Nyangwe, a great slave-market previously visited both
by Livingstone and Cameron. He was also present at some of the horrible
razzias, perpetrated by the officers of the Sultan of Zanzibar in the
districts of the Marunzu and Manyuema.

In order to be in a position to descend the Lualaba to its very mouth,
Stanley engaged at Nyangwe 140 porters and nineteen boats. Difficulties
arose from the very outset, and not only had he to contend with the
cannibals of Ugusu, but, in order to avoid many unnavigable cataracts,
he had to convey his boats many miles by land. Near the equator, just
at the point where the Lualaba turns north-north-west, Stanley's little
convoy was attacked by a fleet of boats, manned by several hundred
natives, whom, however, he succeeded in putting to flight. Nothing
daunted, the resolute American pushed on to lat. 20° N. and
ascertained, beyond room for doubt, that the Lualaba was really the
Upper Zaire or Congo, and that, by following its course, he should come
directly to the sea.

Beset with many perils was the way. Stanley was in almost daily
collision with the various tribes upon the river-banks; on the 3rd of
June, 1877, he lost one of his companions, Frank Pocock, at the passage
of the cataracts of Massassa, and on the 18th of July he was himself
carried in his boat into the Mbelo Falls, and escaped by little short
of a miracle.

On the 6th of August the daring adventurer arrived at the village of Ni
Sanda, only four days from the sea; two days later he received a supply
of provisions that had been sent by two Emboma merchants to Banza
M'buko, the little coast-town where, after a journey of two years and
nine months, fraught with every kind of hardship and privation, he
completed his transit of the mighty continent. His toil told, at least
temporarily, upon his years, but he had the grand satisfaction of
knowing that he had traced the whole course of the Lualaba, and had
ascertained, beyond reach of question, that as the Nile is the great
artery of the north, and the Zambesi of the east, so Africa possesses
in the west a third great river, which in a course of no less than 2900
miles, under the names of the Lualaba, Zaire, and Congo, unites the
lake district with the Atlantic Ocean.

In 1873, however, the date at which the "Pilgrim" foundered upon the
coast, very little was known of the province of Angola, except that it
was the scene of the western slave-trade, of which the markets of Bihé,
Cassanga, and Kazunde were the chief centres. This was the country in
which Dick Sands now found himself, a hundred miles from shore, in
charge of a lady exhausted with fatigue and anxiety, a half-dying
child, and a band of negroes who would be a most tempting bait to the
slave-driver.

His last illusion was completely dispelled. He had no longer the
faintest hope that he was in America, that land where little was to be
dreaded from either native, wild beast, or climate; he could no more
cherish the fond impression that he might be in the pleasant region
between the Cordilleras and the coast, where villages are numerous and
missions afford hospitable shelter to every traveller. Far, far away
were those provinces of Bolivia and Peru, to which (unless a criminal
hand had interposed) the "Pilgrim" would certainly have sped her way.
No: too truly this was the terrible province of Angola; and worse than
all, not the district near the coast, under the surveillance of the
Portuguese authorities, but the interior of the country, traversed only
by slave caravans, driven under the lash of the havildars.

Limited, in one sense, was the knowledge that Dick Sands possessed of
this land of horrors; but he had read the accounts that had been given
by the missionaries of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, by the
Portuguese traders who frequented the route from St. Paul de Loanda, by
San Salvador to the Zaire, as well as by Dr. Livingstone in his travels
in 1853, and consequently he knew enough to awaken immediate and
complete despair in any spirit less indomitable than his own.

Anyhow, his position was truly appalling.

[Illustration: They were seated at the foot of an enormous banyan-tree.]




CHAPTER II.

ACCOMPLICES.


On the day following that on which Dick Sands and his party had made
their last halt in the forest, two men met by appointment at a spot
about three miles distant.

The two men were Harris and Negoro, the one lately landed from New
Zealand, the other pursuing his wonted occupation of slave-dealer in
the province of Angola. They were seated at the foot of an enormous
banyan-tree, on the banks of a rushing torrent that streamed between
tall borders of papyrus.

After the conversation had turned awhile upon the events of the last
few hours, Negoro said abruptly,--

"Couldn't you manage to get that young fifteen-year-old any farther
into the interior?"

"No, indeed; it was a hard matter enough to bring him thus far; for the
last few days his suspicions have been wide awake."

"But just another hundred miles, you know," continued Negoro, "would
have finished the business off well, and those black fellows would have
been ours to a dead certainty."

"Don't I tell you, my dear fellow, that it was more than time for me to
give them the slip?" replied Harris, shrugging his shoulders. "Only too
well I knew that our young friend was longing to put a shot into my
body, and that was a sugar-plum I might not be able to digest."

The Portuguese gave a grunt of assent, and Harris went on,--

"For several days I succeeded well enough. I managed to palm off the
country as the forest of Atacama, which you may recollect I once
visited; but when the youngster began to ask for gutta-percha and
humming-birds, and his mother wanted quinquina-trees, and when that old
fool of a cousin was bent on finding cocuyos, I was rather nonplussed.
One day I had to swear that giraffes were ostriches, but the young
captain did not seem to swallow the dose at all easily. Then we saw
traces of elephants and hippopotamuses, which of course are as often
seen in America as an honest man in a Benguela penitentiary; then that
old nigger Tom discovered a lot of forks and chains left by some
runaway slaves at the foot of a tree; but when, last of all, a lion
roared,--and the noise, you know, is rather louder than the mewing of a
cat,--I thought it was time to take my horse and decamp."

Negoro repeated his expression of regret that the whole party had not
been carried another hundred miles into the province.

"It really cannot be helped," rejoined the American; "I have done the
best I could; and I think, mate," he added confidentially, "that you
have done wisely in following the caravan at a good distance; that dog
of theirs evidently owes you a grudge, and might prove an ugly
customer."

"I shall put a bullet into that beast's head before long," growled
Negoro.

"Take care you don't get one through your own first," laughed Harris;
"that young Sands, I warn you, is a first-rate shot, and between
ourselves, is rather a fine fellow of his kind."

"Fine fellow, indeed!" sneered Negoro; "whatever he is, he is a young
upstart, and I have a long score to wipe off against him;" and, as he
spoke, an expression of the utmost malignity passed over his
countenance.

Harris smiled.

"Well, mate," he said; "your travels have not improved your temper, I
see. But come now, tell me what you have been doing all this time. When
I found you just after the wreck, at the mouth of the Longa, you had
only time to ask me to get this party, somehow or other, up into the
country. But it is just upon two years since you left Cassange with
that caravan of slaves for our old master Alvez. What have you been
doing since? The last I heard of you was that you had run foul of an
English cruiser, and that you were condemned to be hanged."

"So I was very nearly," muttered Negoro.

"Ah, well, that will come sooner or later," rejoined the American with
philosophic indifference; "men of our trade can't expect to die quietly
in our beds, you know. But were you caught by the English?"

"No, by the Portuguese."

"Before you had got rid of your cargo?"

Negoro hesitated a moment before replying.

"No," he said, presently, and added, "The Portuguese have changed their
game: for a long time they carried on the trade themselves, but now
they have got wonderfully particular; so I was caught, and condemned to
end my days in the penitentiary at St. Paul de Loanda."

"Confound it!" exclaimed Harris, "a hundred times better be hanged!"

"I'm not so sure of that," the Portuguese replied, "for when I had been
at the galleys about a fortnight I managed to escape, and got into the
hold of an English steamer bound for New Zealand. I wedged myself in
between a cask of water and a case of preserved meat, and so managed to
exist for a month. It was close quarters, I can tell you, but I
preferred to travel incognito rather than run the risk of being handed
over again to the authorities at Loanda."

"Well done!" exclaimed the American, "and so you had a free passage to
the land of the Maoris. But you didn't come back in the same fashion?"

"No; I always had a hankering to be here again at my old trade; but for
a year and a half...."

He stopped abruptly, and grasped Harris by the arm.

"Hush," he whispered, "didn't you hear a rustling in that clump of
papyrus?"

In a moment Harris had caught up his loaded gun; and both men, starting
to their feet, looked anxiously around them.

"It was nothing," said Harris presently; "the stream is swollen by the
storm, that is all; your two years' travelling has made you forget the
sounds of the forest, mate. Sit down again, and go on with your story.
When I know the past, I shall be better able to talk about the future."

They reseated themselves, and Negoro went on,--

"For a whole year and a half I vegetated at Auckland. I left the hold
of the steamer without a dollar in my pocket, and had to turn my hand
to every trade imaginable in order to get a living."

"Poor fellow! I daresay you even tried the trade of being an honest
man," put in the American.

"Just so," said Negoro, "and in course of time the 'Pilgrim,' the
vessel by which I came here, put in at Auckland. While she was waiting
to take Mrs. Weldon and her party on board, I applied to the captain
for a post, for I was once mate on board a slaver, and know something
of seamanship. The 'Pilgrim's' crew was complete, but fortunately the
ship's cook had just deserted; I offered to supply his place; in
default of better my services were accepted, and in a few days we were
out of sight of New Zealand."

"I have heard something about the voyage from young Sands," said
Harris, "but even now I can't understand how you reached here."

"Neither does he," said Negoro, with a malicious grin. "I will tell you
now, and you may repeat the story to your young friend if you like."

"Well, go on," said Harris.

"When we started," continued Negoro, "it was my intention to sail only
as far as Chili: that would have brought me nearly half way to Angola;
but three weeks after leaving Auckland, Captain Hull and all his crew
were lost in chasing a whale, and I and the apprentice were the only
seamen left on board."

"Then why in the name of peace didn't you take command of the ship?"
exclaimed Harris.

[Illustration: Both men, starting to their feet, looked anxiously
around them.]

"Because there were five strong niggers who didn't trust me; so, on
second thoughts, I determined to keep my old post as cook."

"Then do you mean to say that it was mere accident that brought you to
the coast of Africa?"

"Not a bit of it; the only accident,--and a very lucky one it was--was
meeting you on the very spot where we stranded. But it was my doing
that we got so far. Young Sands understood nothing more of navigation
than the use of the log and compass. Well, one fine day, you
understand, the log remained at the bottom of the sea, and one night
the compass was tampered with, so that the 'Pilgrim,' scudding along
before a tempest, was carried altogether out of her course. You may
imagine the young captain was puzzled at the length of the voyage; it
would have bewildered a more experienced head than his. Before he was
aware of it, we had rounded Cape Horn; I recognized it through the
mist. Then at once I put the compass to rights again, and the 'Pilgrim'
was carried north-eastwards by a tremendous hurricane to the very place
I wanted. The island Dick Sands took for Easter Island was really
Tristan d'Acunha."

"Good!" said Harris; "I think I understand now how our friends have
been persuaded to take Angola for Bolivia. But they are undeceived now,
you know," he added.

"I know all about that," replied the Portuguese.

"Then what do you intend to do?" said Harris.

"You will see," answered Negoro significantly; "but first of all tell
me something about our employer, old Alvez; how is he?"

"Oh, the old rascal is well enough, and will be delighted to see you
again," replied Harris.

"Is he at the market at Bihé?"

"No, he has been at his place at Kazonndé for a year or more."

"And how does business go on?"

"Badly enough, on this coast," said Harris; "plenty of slaves are
waiting to be shipped to the Spanish colonies, but the difficulty is
how to get them embarked. The Portuguese authorities on the one hand,
and the English cruisers on the other, almost put a stop to exportation
altogether; down to the south, near Mossamedes, is the only part where
it can be attempted with any chance of success. To pass a caravan
through Benguela or Loande is an utter impossibility; neither the
governors nor the chefés[1] will listen to a word of reason. Old Alvez
is therefore thinking of going in the other direction towards Nyangwe
and Lake Tanganyika; he can there exchange his goods for slaves and
ivory, and is sure to do a good business with Upper Egypt and the coast
of Mozambique, which supplies Madagascar. But I tell you, Negoro," he
added gravely, "I believe the time is coming when the slave-trade will
come to an end altogether. The English missionaries are advancing into
the interior. That fellow Livingstone, confound him! has finished his
tour of the lakes, and is now working his way towards Angola; then
there is another man named Cameron who is talking about crossing the
continent from east to west, and it is feared that Stanley the American
will do the same. All this exploration, you know, is ruinous to our
business, and it is to our interest that not one of these travellers
should be allowed to return to tell tales of us in Europe."


[Footnote 1: Subordinate Portuguese governors at secondary stations.]


Harris spoke like a merchant embarrassed by a temporary commercial
crisis. The atrocious scenes to which the slave-dealers are accustomed
seems to render them impervious to all sense of justice or humanity,
and they learn to regard their living merchandize with as small concern
as though they were dealing with chests of tea or hogsheads of sugar.

But Harris was right when he asserted that civilization must follow the
wake of the intrepid pioneers of African discovery. Livingstone first,
and after him, Grant, Speke, Burton, Cameron, Stanley, are the heroes
whose names will ever be linked with the first dawnings of a brighter
age upon the dark wilds of Equatorial Africa.

Having ascertained that his accomplice had returned unscrupulous and
daring as ever, and fully prepared to pursue his former calling as an
agent of old Alvez the slave dealer, Harris inquired what he proposed
doing with the survivors of the "Pilgrim" now that they were in his
hands.

"Divide them into two lots," answered Negoro, without a moment's
hesitation, "one for the market, the other...."

He did not finish his sentence, but the expression of his countenance
was an index to the malignity of his purpose.

"Which shall you sell?" asked the American.

"The niggers, of course. The old one is not worth much, but the other
four ought to fetch a good price at Kazonndé."

"Yes, you are right," said Harris; "American-born slaves, with plenty
of work in them, are rare articles, and very different to the miserable
wretches we get up the country. But you never told me," he added,
suddenly changing the subject, "whether you found any money on board
the 'Pilgrim'!"

"Oh, I rescued a few hundred dollars from the wreck, that was all,"
said the Portuguese carelessly; "but I am expecting...." he stopped
short.

"What are you expecting?" inquired Harris eagerly.

"Oh, nothing, nothing," said Negoro, apparently annoyed that he had
said so much, and immediately began talking of the means of securing
the living prey which he had been taking so many pains to entrap.
Harris informed him that on the Coanza, about ten miles distant, there
was at the present time encamped a slave caravan, under the control of
an Arab named Ibn Hamish; plenty of native soldiers were there on
guard, and if Dick Sands and his people could only be induced to travel
in that direction, their capture would be a matter of very little
difficulty. He said that of course Dick Sands' first thought would
naturally be how to get back to the coast; it was not likely that he
would venture a second time through the forest, but would in all
probability try to make his way to the nearest river, and descend its
course on a raft to the sea. The nearest river was undoubtedly the
Coanza, so that he and Negoro might feel quite sure of meeting "their
friends" upon its banks.

"If you really think so," said Negoro, "there is not much time to be
lost; whatever young Sands determines to do, he will do at once: he
never lets the grass grow under his feet."

"Let us start, then, this very moment, mate," was Harris's reply.

Both rose to their feet, when they were startled by the same rustling
in the papyrus which had previously aroused Negoro's fears. Presently a
low growl was heard, and a large dog, showing his teeth, emerged from
the bushes, evidently prepared for an attack.

"It's Dingo!" exclaimed Harris.

"Confound the brute! he shall not escape me this time," said Negoro.

He caught up Harris's gun, and raising it to his shoulder, he fired
just as the dog was in the act of springing at his throat. A long whine
of pain followed the report, and Dingo disappeared again amongst the
bushes that fringed the stream. Negoro was instantly upon his track,
but could discover nothing beyond a few blood-stains upon the stalks of
the papyrus, and a long crimson trail upon the pebbles on the bank.

"I think I have done for the beast now," was Negoro's remark as he
returned from his fruitless search.

Harris, who had been a silent spectator of the whole scene, now asked
coolly,--

"What makes that animal have such an inveterate dislike to you?"

"Oh, there is an old score to settle between us," replied the
Portuguese.

"What about?" inquired the American.

Negoro made no reply, and finding him evidently disinclined to be
communicative on the subject, Harris did not press the matter any
further.

A few moments later the two men were descending the stream, and making
their way through the forest towards the Coanza.

[Illustration: Dingo disappeared again amongst the bushes]




CHAPTER III.

ON THE MARCH AGAIN.


"Africa! Africa!" was the terrible word that echoed and re-echoed in
the mind of Dick Sands. As he pondered over the events of the preceding
weeks he could now understand why, notwithstanding the rapid progress
of the ship, the land seemed ever to be receding, and why the voyage
had been prolonged to twice its anticipated length. It remained,
however, a mystery inexplicable as before, how and when they had
rounded Cape Horn and passed into another ocean. Suddenly the idea
flashed upon him that the compass must have been tampered with; and he
remembered the fall of the first compass; he recalled the night when he
had been roused by Tom's cry of alarm that Negoro had fallen against
the binnacle. As he recollected these circumstances he became more and
more convinced that it was Negoro who was the mainspring of all the
mischief; that it was he who had contrived the loss of the "Pilgrim,"
and compromised the safety of all on board.

What had been the career, what could be the motives of a man who was
capable of such vile machinations?

But shrouded in mystery as were the events of the past, the present
offered a prospect equally obscure.

Beyond the fact that he was in Africa and a hundred miles from the
coast, Dick knew absolutely nothing. He could only conjecture that he
was in the fatal province of Angola, and assured as he was that Harris
had acted the traitor, he was led to the conclusion that he and Negoro
had been playing into each other's hands. The result of the collision,
he feared, might be very disastrous to the survivors of the "Pilgrim."
Yet, in what manner would the odious stratagem be accomplished? Dick
could well understand that the negroes would be sold for slaves; he
could only too easily imagine that upon himself Negoro would wreak the
vengeance he had so obviously been contemplating; but for Mrs. Weldon
and the other helpless members of the party what fate could be in store?

The situation was terrible, but yet Dick did not flinch; he had been
appointed captain, and captain he would remain; Mrs. Weldon and her
little son had been committed to his charge, and he was resolved to
carry out his trust faithfully to the end.

For several hours he remained wrapped in thought, pondering over the
present and the future, weighing the evil chances against the good,
only to be convinced that the evil much preponderated. At length he
rose, firm, resolute, calm. The first glimmer of dawn was breaking upon
the forest. All the rest of the party, except Tom, were fast asleep.
Dick Sands crept softly up to the old negro, and whispered:--

"Tom, you know now where we are!"

"Yes, yes, Mr. Dick, only too well I know it. We are in Africa!"

The old man sighed mournfully.

"Tom," said Dick, in the same low voice, "you must keep this a secret;
you must not say a word to let Mrs. Weldon or any of the others know."

The old man murmured his assent, and Dick continued:--

"It will be quite enough for them to learn that we have been betrayed
by Harris, and that we must consequently practise extra care and
watchfulness; they will merely think we are taking precautions against
being surprised by nomad Indians. I trust to your good sense, Tom, to
assist me in this."

"You may depend upon me, Mr. Dick; and I can promise you that we will
all do our best to prove our courage, and to show our devotion to your
service."

[Illustration: "You must keep this a secret"]

Thus assured of Tom's co-operation, Dick proceeded to deliberate upon
his future line of action. He had every reason to believe that the
treacherous American, startled by the traces of the slaves and the
unexpected roaring of the lion, had taken flight before he had
conducted his victims to the spot where they were to be attacked, and
that consequently some hours might elapse before he would be joined by
Negoro, who (to judge from Dingo's strange behaviour) had undoubtedly
for the last few days been somewhere on their track.

Here was a delay that might be turned to good account, and no time was
to be lost in taking advantage of it to commence their return journey
to the coast. If, as Dick had every reason to suppose, he was in
Angola, he hoped to find, either north or south, some Portuguese
settlement whence he could obtain the means of transporting his party
to their several homes.

But how was this return journey to be accomplished? It would be
difficult, not to say imprudent, to retrace their footsteps through the
forest; it would merely bring them to their starting-point, and would,
moreover, afford an easy track for Negoro or his accomplices to follow.
The safest and most secret means of reaching the coast would assuredly
be by descending the course of some river. This would have to be
effected by constructing a strong raft, from which the little party,
well armed, might defend themselves alike from attacks either of the
natives or of wild beasts, and which would likewise afford a
comfortable means of transport for Mrs. Weldon and her little boy, who
were now deprived of the use of Harris's horse. The negroes, it is
true, would be only too pleased to carry the lady on a litter of
branches, but this would be to occupy the services of two out of five,
and under the circumstances it was manifestly advisable that all hands
should be free to act on the defensive. Another great inducement
towards the plan was that Dick Sands felt himself much more at home in
travelling by water than by land, and was longing to be once again upon
what to him was, as it were, his native element. He little dreamt that
he was devising for himself the very plan that Harris, in his
speculations, had laid down for him!

The most urgent matter was now to find such a stream as would suit
their purpose. Dick had several reasons for feeling sure that one
existed in the neighbourhood. He knew that the little river, which fell
into the Atlantic near the spot where the "Pilgrim" stranded, could not
extend very far either to the north or east, because the horizon was
bounded in both directions by the chain of mountains which he had taken
for the Cordilleras. If the stream did not rise in those hills it must
incline to the south, so that in either case Dick was convinced he
could not be long in discovering it or one of its affluents. Another
sign, which he recognized as hopeful, was that during the last few
miles of the march the soil had become moist and level, whilst here and
there the appearance of tiny rivulets indicated that an aqueous network
existed in the subsoil. On the previous day, too, the caravan had
skirted a rushing torrent, of which the waters were tinged with oxide
of iron from its sloping banks.

Dick's scheme was to make his way back as far as this stream, which
though not navigable itself would in all probability empty itself into
some affluent of greater importance. The idea, which he imparted to
Tom, met with the old negro's entire approval.

As the day dawned the sleepers, one by one, awoke. Mrs. Weldon laid
little Jack in Nan's arms. The child was still dozing; the fever had
abated, but he looked painfully white and exhausted after the attack.

"Dick," said Mrs. Weldon, after looking round her, "where is Mr.
Harris? I cannot see him."

"Harris has left us," answered Dick very quietly.

"Do you mean that he has gone on ahead?"

"No, madam, I mean that he has left us, and gone away entirely: he is
in league with Negoro."

"In league with Negoro!" cried Mrs. Weldon, "Ah, I have had a fancy
lately that there has been something wrong: but why? what can be their
motive?"

"Indeed I am unable to tell you," replied Dick; "I only know that we
have no alternative but to return to the coast immediately if we would
escape the two rascals."

[Illustration: "Harris has left us"]

"I only wish I could catch them," said Hercules, who had overheard the
conversation; "I would soon knock their heads together;" and he shook
his two fists in giving emphasis to his words.

"But what will become of my boy?" cried Mrs. Weldon, in tones of
despondency; "I have been so sanguine in procuring him the comforts of
San Felice."

"Master Jack will be all right enough, madam, when we get into a more
healthy situation near the coast," said Tom.

"But is there no farm anywhere near? no village? no shelter?" she
pleaded.

"None whatever, madam; I can only repeat that it is absolutely
necessary that we make the best of our way back to the sea-shore."

"Are you quite sure, Dick, that Mr. Harris has deceived us?"

Dirk felt that he should be glad to avoid any discussion on the
subject, but with a warning glance at Tom, he proceeded to say that on
the previous night he and Tom had discovered the American's treachery,
and that if he had not instantly taken to his horse and fled he would
have answered for his guilt with his life. Without, however, dwelling
for a moment more than he could avoid upon the past, he hurried on to
detail the means by which he now proposed to reach the sea, concluding
by the assertion that he hoped a very few miles' march would bring them
to a stream on which they might be able to embark.

Mrs. Weldon, thoroughly ignoring her own weakness, professed her
readiness not only to walk, but to carry Jack too. Bat and Austin at
once volunteered to carry her in a litter; of this the lady would not
hear, and bravely repeated her intention of travelling on foot,
announcing her willingness to start without further delay. Dick Sands
was only too glad to assent to her wish.

"Let me take Master Jack," said Hercules; "I shall be out of my element
if I have nothing to carry."

The giant, without waiting for a reply, took the child from Nan's arms
so gently that he did not even rouse him from his slumber.

The weapons were next carefully examined, and the provisions, having
been repacked into one parcel, were consigned to the charge of Actæon,
who undertook to carry them on his back.

Cousin Benedict, whose wiry limbs seemed capable of bearing any amount
of fatigue, was quite ready to start. It was doubtful whether he had
noticed Harris's disappearance; he was suffering from a loss which to
him was of far greater importance. He had mislaid his spectacles and
magnifying-glass. It had happened that Bat had picked them up in the
long grass, close to the spot where the amateur naturalist had been
lying, but acting on a hint from Dick Sands, he said nothing about
them; in this way the entomologist, who, without his glasses could
scarcely see a yard beyond his face, might be expected to be kept
without trouble in the limits of the ranks, and having been placed
between Actæon and Austin with strict injunctions not to leave their
side, he followed them as submissively as a blind man in
leading-strings.

The start was made. But scarcely had the little troop advanced fifty
yards upon their way, when Tom suddenly cried out,--

"Where's Dingo?"

With all the force of his tremendous lungs, Hercules gave a series of
reverberating shouts:--

"Dingo! Dingo! Dingo!"

Not a bark could be distinguished in reply

"Dingo! Dingo! Dingo!" again echoed in the air.

But all was silence.

Dick was intensely annoyed at the non-appearance of the dog; his
presence would have been an additional safeguard in the event of any
sudden surprise.

"Perhaps he has followed Harris," suggested Tom.

"Far more likely he is on the track of Negoro," rejoined Dick.

"Then Negoro, to a dead certainty," said Hercules, "will put a bullet
into his head."

"It is to be hoped," replied Bat, "that Dingo will strangle him first."

Dick Sands, disguising his vexation, said,

"At any rate, we have no time to wait for the animal now: if he is
alive, he will not fail to find us out. Move on, my lads! move on!"

The weather was very hot; ever since daybreak heavy clouds had been
gathering upon the horizon, and it seemed hardly likely that the day
would pass without a storm. Fortunately the woods were sufficiently
light to ensure a certain amount of freshness to the surface of the
soil. Here and there were large patches of tall, rank grass enclosed by
clumps of forest trees. In some places, fossilized trunks, lying on the
ground, betokened the existence of one of the coal districts that are
common upon the continent of Africa. Along the glades the carpet of
verdure was relieved by crimson stems and a variety of flowers;
ginger-blossoms, blue and yellow, pale lobelias, and red orchids
fertilized by the numerous insects that incessantly hovered about them.
The trees did not grow in impenetrable masses of one species, but
exhibited themselves in infinite variety. There was also a species of
palm producing an oil locally much valued; there were cotton-plants
growing in bushes eight or ten feet high, the cotton attached in long
shreds to the ligneous stalks; and there were copals from which,
pierced by the proboscis of certain insects, exudes an odorous resin
that flows on to the ground and is collected by the natives. Then there
were citrons and wild pomegranates and a score of other arborescent
plants, all testifying to the fertility of this plateau of Central
Africa. In many places, too, the air was fragrant with the odour of
vanilla, though it was not possible to discover the shrub from which
the perfume emanated.

In spite of it being the dry season, so that the soil had only been
moistened by occasional storms, all trees and plants were flourishing
in great luxuriance. It was the time of year for fever, but, according
to Dr. Livingstone's observation, the disorder may generally be cured
by quitting the locality where it has been contracted. Dick expressed
his hope that, in little Jack's case, the words of the great traveller
would be verified, and in encouragement of this sanguine view, pointed
out to Mrs. Weldon that although it was past the time for the
periodical return of the fever, the child was still slumbering quietly
in Hercules' arms.

The march was continued with as much rapidity as was consistent with
caution. Occasionally, where the bushes and brushwood had been broken
down by the recent passage of men or beasts, progress was comparatively
easy; but much more frequently, greatly to Dick's annoyance, obstacles
of various sorts impeded their advance. Climbing plants grew in such
inextricable confusion that they could only be compared to a ship's
rigging involved in hopeless entanglement; there were creepers
resembling curved scimitars, thickly covered with sharp thorns; there
were likewise strange growths, like vegetable serpents, fifty or sixty
feet long, which seemed to have a cruel faculty for torturing every
passenger with their prickly spines. Axe in hand, the negroes had
repeatedly to cut their road through these bewildering obstructions
that clothed the trees from their summit to their base.

Animal life was no less remarkable in its way than the vegetation.
Birds in great variety flitted about in the ample foliage, secure from
any stray shot from the little band, whose chief object it was to
preserve its incognito. Guinea-fowls were seen in considerable numbers,
francolins in several varieties, and a few specimens of the bird to
which the Americans, in imitation of their note, have given the name of
"whip-poor-will." If Dick had not had too much evidence in other ways
to the contrary, he might almost have imagined himself in a province of
the New World.

Hitherto they had been unmolested by any dangerous wild beasts. During
the present stage of their march a herd of giraffes, startled by their
unexpected approach, rushed fleetly past; this time, however, without
being represented as ostriches. Occasionally a dense cloud of dust on
the edge of the prairie, accompanied by a sound like the roll of
heavily-laden chariots, betokened the flight of a herd of buffaloes;
but with these exceptions no animal of any magnitude appeared in view.

[Illustration: The march was continued with as much rapidity as was
consistent with caution.]

For about two miles Dick followed the course of the rivulet, in the
hope that it would emerge into a more important stream, which would
convey them without much difficulty or danger direct to the sea.

Towards noon about three miles had been accomplished, and a halt was
made for rest. Neither Negoro nor Harris had been seen, nor had Dingo
reappeared. The encampment for the midday refreshment was made under
the shelter of a clump of bamboos, which effectually concealed them
all. Few words were spoken during the meal. Mrs. Weldon could eat
nothing; she had again taken her little boy into her arms, and seemed
wholly absorbed in watching him. Again and again Dick begged her to
take some nourishment, urging upon her the necessity of keeping up her
strength.

"We shall not be long in finding a good current to carry us to the
coast," said the lad brightly.

Mrs. Weldon raised her eyes to his animated features. With so sanguine
and resolute a leader, with such devoted servants as the five negroes
in attendance, she felt that she ought not utterly to despair. Was she
not, after all, on friendly soil? what great harm could Harris
perpetrate against her or her belongings? She would hope still, hope
for the best.

Rejoiced as he was to see something of its former brightness return to
her countenance, Dick nevertheless had scarcely courage steadily to
return her searching gaze. Had she known the whole truth, he knew that
her heart must fail her utterly.




CHAPTER IV.

ROUGH TRAVELLING.


Just at this moment Jack woke up and put his arms round his mother's
neck. His eyes were brighter, and there was manifestly no return of
fever.

"You are better, darling!" said Mrs. Weldon, pressing him tenderly to
her.

"Yes, mamma, I am better; but I am very thirsty."

Some cold water was soon procured, which the child drank eagerly, and
then began to look about him. His first inquiry was for his old
friends, Dick and Hercules, both of whom approached at his summons and
greeted him affectionately.

"Where is the horse?" was the next question.

"Gone away, Master Jack; I am your horse now," said Hercules.

"But you have no bridle for me to hold," said Jack, looking rather
disappointed.

"You may put a bit in my mouth if you like, master Jack," replied
Hercules, extending his jaws, "and then you may pull as hard as you
please."

"O, I shall not pull very hard," said Jack; "but haven't we nearly come
to Mr. Harris's farm?"

Mrs. Weldon assured the child that they should soon be where they
wanted to be, and Dick, finding that the conversation was approaching
dangerous ground, proposed that the journey should be now resumed. Mrs.
Weldon assented; the encampment was forthwith broken up and the march
continued as before.

[Illustration: It was a scene only too common in Central Africa]

In order not to lose sight of the watercourse, it was necessary to cut
a way right through the underwood: progress was consequently very slow;
and a little over a mile was all that was accomplished in about three
hours. Footpaths had evidently once existed, but they had all become
what the natives term "dead," that is, they had become entirely
overgrown with brushwood and brambles. The negroes worked away with a
will; Hercules, in particular, who temporarily resigned his charge to
Nan, wielded his axe with marvellous effect, all the time giving vent
to stentorian groans and grunts, and succeeded in opening the woods
before him as if they were being consumed by a devouring fire.

Fortunately this heavy labour was not of very long duration.

After about a mile, an opening of moderate width, converging towards
the stream and following its bank, was discovered in the underwood. It
was a passage formed by elephants, which apparently by hundreds must be
in the habit of traversing this part of the forest. The spongy soil,
soaked by the downpour of the rainy season, was everywhere indented
with the enormous impressions of their feet.

But it soon became evident that elephants were not the only living
creatures that had used this track. Human bones gnawed by beasts of
prey, whole human skeletons, still wearing the iron fetters of slavery,
everywhere strewed the ground. It was a scene only too common in
Central Africa, where like cattle driven to the slaughter, poor
miserable men are dragged in caravans for hundreds of weary miles, to
perish on the road in countless numbers beneath the trader's lash, to
succumb to the mingled horrors of fatigue, privation, and disease, or,
if provisions fail, to be butchered, without pity or remorse, by sword
and gun.

That slave-caravans had passed that way was too obvious to permit a
doubt. For at least a mile, at almost every step Dick came in contact
with the scattered bones; while ever and again huge goat suckers,
disturbed by the approach of the travellers, rose with flapping wings,
and circled round their heads.

The youth's heart sank with secret dismay lest Mrs. Weldon should
divine the meaning of this ghastly scene, and appeal to him for
explanation, but fortunately she had again insisted on carrying her
little patient, and although the child was fast asleep, he absorbed her
whole attention. Nan was by her side, almost equally engrossed. Old Tom
alone was fully alive to the significance of his surroundings, and with
downcast eyes he mournfully pursued his march. Full of amazement, the
other negroes looked right and left upon what might appear to them as
the upheaval of some vast cemetery, but they uttered no word of inquiry
or surprise.

Meantime the bed of the stream had increased both in breadth and depth,
and the rivulet had in a degree lost its character of a rushing
torrent. This was a change which Dick Sands observed hopefully,
interpreting it as an indication that it might itself become navigable,
or would empty itself into some more important tributary of the
Atlantic. His resolve was fixed: he would follow its course at all
hazards. As soon, therefore, as he found that the elephant's track was
quitting the water's edge, he made up his mind to abandon it, and had
no hesitation in again resorting to the use of the axe. Once more,
then, commenced the labour of cutting a way through the entanglement of
bushes and creepers that were thick upon the soil. It was no longer
forest through which they were wending their arduous path; trees were
comparatively rare; only tall clumps of bamboos rose above the grass,
so high, however, that even Hercules could not see above them, and the
passage of the little troop could only have been discovered by the
rustling in the stalks.

In the course of the afternoon, the soil became soft and marshy. It was
evident that the travellers were crossing plains that in a long rainy
season must be inundated. The ground was carpeted with luxuriant mosses
and graceful ferns, and the continual appearance of brown hematite
wherever there was a rise in the soil, betokened the existence of a
rich vein of metal beneath.

Remembering what he had read in Dr. Livingstone's account of these
treacherous swamps, Dick bade his companions take their footing warily.
He himself led the way. Tom expressed his surprise that the ground
should be so soaked when there had been no rain for some time.

"I think we shall have a storm soon," said Bat,

"All the more reason, then," replied Dick, "why we should get away from
these marshes as quickly as possible. Carry Jack again, Hercules; and
you, Bat and Austin, keep close to Mrs. Weldon, so as to be able to
assist her if she wants your help. But take care, take care, Mr.
Benedict!" he cried out in sudden alarm; "what are you doing, sir?"

"I'm slipping in," was poor Benedict's helpless reply. He had trodden
upon a kind of quagmire and, as though a trap had been opened beneath
his feet, was fast disappearing into the slough. Assistance was
immediately rendered, and the unfortunate naturalist was dragged out,
covered with mud almost to his waist, but thoroughly satisfied because
his precious box of specimens had suffered no injury. Actæon undertook
for the future to keep close to his side, and endeavour to avoid a
repetition of the mishap.

The accident could not be said to be altogether free from unpleasant
consequences. Air-bubbles in great numbers had risen to the surface of
the mire from which Benedict had been extricated, and as they burst
they disseminated an odious stench that was well-nigh intolerable. The
passage of these pestilential districts is not unfrequently very
dangerous, and Livingstone, who on several occasions waded through them
in mud that reached to his breast, compares them to great sponges
composed of black porous earth, in which every footstep causes streams
of moisture to ooze out.

For well nigh half a mile they had now to wend their cautious way
across this spongy soil. Mrs. Weldon, ankle-deep in the soft mud, was
at last compelled to come to a stand-still; and Hercules, Bat, and
Austin, all resolved that she should be spared further discomfort, and
insisted upon weaving some bamboos into a litter, upon which, after
much reluctance to become such a burden, she was induced, with Jack
beside her, to take her place.

After the delay thus caused, the procession again started on its
perilous route. Dick Sands continued to walk at the head, in order to
test the stability of the footing; Action followed, holding Cousin
Benedict firmly by the arm; Tom took charge of old Nan, who without his
support would certainly have fallen into the quagmire; and the three
other negroes carried the litter in the rear. It was a matter of the
greatest difficulty to find a path that was sufficiently firm; the
method they adopted was to pick their way as much as possible on the
long rank grass that on the margin of the swamps was tolerably tough;
but in spite of the greatest precaution, there was not one of them who
escaped occasionally sinking up to his knees in slush.

At about five o'clock they were relieved by finding themselves on
ground of a more clayey character; it was still soft and porous below,
but its surface was hard enough to give a secure foothold. There were
watery pores that percolated the subsoil, and these gave evident
witness to the proximity of a river-district.

The heat would have been intolerably oppressive if it had not been
tempered by some heavy storm-clouds which obstructed the direct
influence of the sun's rays. Lightning was observed to be playing
faintly about the sky, and there was now and again the low growl of
distant thunder. The indications of a gathering storm were too manifest
to be disregarded, and Dick could not help being very uneasy. He had
heard of the extreme violence of African storms, and knew that torrents
of rain, hurricanes that no tree could resist, and thunderbolt after
thunderbolt were the usual accompaniment of these tempests. And here in
this lowland desert, which too surely would be completely inundated,
there would not be a tree to which they could resort for shelter, while
it would likewise be utterly vain to hope to obtain a refuge by
excavation, as water would be found only two feet below the surface.

[Illustration: Another brilliant flash brought the camp once again into
relief.]

After scrutinizing the landscape, however, he noticed some low
elevations on the north that seemed to form the boundary of the marshy
plain. A few trees were scattered along their summits; if his party
could get no other shelter here, he hoped they would be able to find
themselves free from any danger caused by the rising flood.

"Push on, friends, push on!" he cried; "three miles more, and we shall
be out of this treacherous lowland."

His words served to inspire a fresh confidence, and in spite of all the
previous fatigue, every energy was brought into play with renewed
vigour. Hercules, in particular, seemed ready to carry the whole party,
if it had been in his power.

The storm was not long in beginning. The rising ground was still two
miles away. Although the sun was above the horizon, the darkness was
almost complete; the overhanging volumes of vapour sank lower and lower
towards the earth, but happily the full force of the deluge which must
ultimately come did not descend as yet. Lightning, red and blue,
flashed on every side and appeared to cover the ground with a network
of flame.

Ever and again the little knot of travellers were in peril of being
struck by the thunderbolts which, on that treeless plain, had no other
object of attraction. Poor little Jack, who had been awakened by the
perpetual crashes, buried his face in terror in Hercules' breast,
anxious, however, not to distress his mother by any outward exhibition
of alarm. The good-natured negro endeavoured to pacify him by promises
that the lightning should not touch him, and the child, ever confident
in the protection of his huge friend, lost something of his nervousness.

But it could not be long before the clouds would burst and discharge
the threatened down-pour.

"What are we to do, Tom?" asked Dick, drawing up close to the negro's
side.

"We must make a rush for it; push on with all the speed we can."

"But where?" cried Dick.

"Straight on," was the prompt reply; "if the rain catches us here on
the plain we shall all be drowned."

"But where are we to go?" repeated Dick, in despair; "if only there
were a hut! But look, look there!"

A vivid flash of lightning had lit up the country, and Dick declared
that he could see a camp which could hardly be more than a quarter of a
mile ahead.

The negro looked doubtful.

"I saw it too," he assented: "but if it be a camp at all it would be a
camp of natives; and to fall into that would involve us in a worse fate
than the rain."

Another brilliant flash brought the camp once again into relief; it
appeared to be made up of about a hundred conical tents, arranged very
symmetrically, each of them being from twelve to fifteen feet in
height. It had the appearance, from a distance, of being deserted; if
it were really so, it would afford just the shelter that was needed;
otherwise, at all hazards, it must be most carefully avoided.

"I will go in advance," said Dick, after a moment's reflection, "and
reconnoitre it."

"Let one of us, at least, go with you," replied Tom.

"No, stay where you are; I shall be much less likely to be discovered
if I go alone."

Without another word, he darted off, and was soon lost in the sombre
darkness that was only broken by the frequent lightning.

Large drops of rain were now beginning to fall.

Tom and Dick had been walking some little distance in advance of the
rest of the party, who consequently had not overheard their
conversation. A halt being made, Mrs. Weldon inquired what was the
matter. Tom explained that a camp or village had been noticed a little
way in front, and that the captain had gone forward to investigate it.
Mrs. Weldon asked no further questions, but quietly waited the result.
It was only a few minutes before Dick returned.

"You may come on," he cried.

"Is the camp deserted?" asked Tom.

"It is not a camp at all; it is a lot of ant-hills!"

"Ant-hills!" echoed Benedict, suddenly aroused into a state of
excitement.

[Illustration: One after another, the whole party made their way inside]

"No doubt of it, Mr. Benedict." replied Dick; "they are ant-hills
twelve feet high at least: and I hope we shall be able to get into
them."

"Twelve feet!" the naturalist repeated; "they must be those of the
termites, the white ants; there is no other insect that could make
them. Wonderful architects are the termites."

"Termites, or whatever they are, they will have to turn out for us,"
said Dick.

"But they will eat us up!" objected Benedict.

"I can't help that," retorted Dick; "go we must, and go at once."

"But stop a moment," continued the provoking naturalist; "stop, and
tell me: I can't be wrong: I always thought that white ants could never
be found elsewhere than in Africa."

"Come along, sir, I say; come along, quick!" shouted Dick, terrified
lest Mrs. Weldon should have overheard him.

They hurried on. A wind had risen; large spattering drops were now
beginning to fall more heavily on the ground and in a few minutes it
would be impossible to stand against the advancing tempest. The nearest
of the accumulation of ant-hills was reached in time, and however
dangerous their occupants might be, it was decided either to expel
them, or to share their quarters. Each cone was formed of a kind of
reddish clay, and had a single opening at its base. Hercules took his
hatchet, and quickly enlarged the aperture till it would admit his own
huge body. Not an ant made its appearance. Cousin Benedict expressed
his extreme surprise. But the structure unquestionably was empty, and
one after another the whole party made their way inside.

The rain by this time was descending in terrific torrents, strong
enough to extinguish, one would think, the most violent explosions of
the electric fluid. But the travellers were secure in their shelter,
and had nothing to fear for the present; their tenement was of greater
stability than a tent or a native hut. It was one of those marvellous
structures erected by little insects, which to Cameron appeared even
more wonderful than the upraising of the Egyptian pyramids by human
hands. To use his own comparison, it might be likened to the
construction of a Mount Everest, the loftiest of the Himalayan peaks,
by the united labour of a nation.




CHAPTER V.

WHITE ANTS.


The storm had now burst in full fury, and fortunate it was that a
refuge had been found. The rain did not fall in separate drops as in
temperate zones, but descended like the waters of a cataract, in one
solid and compact mass, in a way that could only suggest the outpour of
some vast aerial basin containing the waters of an entire ocean.
Contrary, too, to the storms of higher latitudes, of which the duration
seems ordinarily to be in inverse ratio to their violence, these
African tempests, whatever their magnitude, often last for whole days,
furrowing the soil into deep ravines, changing plains to lakes and
brooks to torrents, and causing rivers to overflow and cover vast
districts with their inundations. It is hard to understand whence such
volumes of vapour and electric fluid can accumulate. The earth, upon
these occasions, might almost seem to be carried back to the remote
period which has been called "the diluvian age."

Happily, the walls of the ant-hill were very thick; no beaver-hut
formed of pounded earth could be more perfectly water-tight, and a
torrent might have passed over it without a particle of moisture making
its way through its substance.

As soon as the party had taken possession of the tenement, a lantern
was lighted, and they proceeded to examine the interior. The cone,
which was about twelve feet high inside, was eleven feet wide at the
base, gradually narrowing to a sugar-loaf top. The walls and partitions
between the tiers of cells were nowhere less than a foot thick
throughout.

These wonderful erections, the result of the combined labour of
innumerable insects, are by no means uncommon in the heart of Africa.
Smeathman, a Dutch traveller of the last century, has recorded how he
and four companions all at one time occupied the summit of one of them
in Loundé. Livingstone noticed some made of red clay, of which the
height varied from fifteen to twenty feet; and in Nyangwé, Cameron
several times mistook one of these colonies for a native camp pitched
upon the plain. He described some of these strange edifices as being
flanked with small spires, giving them the appearance of a
cathedral-dome.

The reddish clay of which the ant-hill was composed could leave no
doubt upon the mind of a naturalist that it had been formed by the
species known as "termes bellicosus;" had it been made of grey or black
alluvial soil, it might have been attributed to the "termes mordax" or
"termes atrox," formidable names that must awaken anything but pleasure
in the minds of all but enthusiast entomologists.

In the centre was an open space, surrounded by roomy compartments,
ranged one upon another, like the berths of a ship's cabin, and lined
with the millions of cells that had been occupied by the ants. This
central space was inadequate to hold the whole party that had now made
their hurried resort to it, but as each of the compartments was
sufficiently capacious to admit one person to occupy it in a sitting
posture, Mrs. Weldon, Jack, Nan, and Cousin Benedict were exalted to
the upper tier, Austin, Bat, and Actæon occupied the next story, whilst
Tom and Hercules, and Dick Sands himself remained below.

Dick soon found that the soil beneath his feet was beginning to get
damp, and insisted upon having some of the dry clay spread over it from
the base of the cone.

"It is a long time," he said, "since we have slept with a roof over our
heads; and I am anxious to make our refuge as secure as possible. It
may be that we shall have to stay here for a whole day or more; on the
first opportunity I shall go and explore; it may turn out that we are
near the stream we are seeking; and perhaps we shall have to build a
raft before we start again."

[Illustration: Cousin Benedict's curiosity was awakened.]

Under his direction, therefore, Hercules took his hatchet, and
proceeded to break down the lowest range of cells and to spread the
dry, brittle clay of which they were composed a good foot thick over
the damp floor, taking care not in any way to block up the aperture by
which the fresh air penetrated into the interior.

It was indeed fortunate that the termites had abandoned their home; had
it swarmed with its multitudes of voracious Neuroptera, the ant-hill
would have been utterly untenable for human beings. Cousin Benedict's
curiosity was awakened, and he was intensely interested in the question
of the evacuation, so that he proceeded at once to investigate, if he
could, whether the emigration had been recent or otherwise. He took the
lantern, and as the result of his scrutiny he soon discovered in a
recess what he described as the termites' "storehouse," or the place
where the indefatigable insects keep their provisions. It was a large
cavity, not far from the royal cell, which, together with the cells for
the reception of the young larvae, had been destroyed by Hercules in
the course of his flooring operations. Out of this receptacle Benedict
drew a considerable quantity of gum and vegetable juices, all in a
state so liquid as to demonstrate that they had been deposited there
quite recently.

"They have only just gone," he exclaimed, with an air of authority, as
if he imagined that some one was about to challenge his assertion.

"We are not going to dispute your word, Mr. Benedict," said Dick; "here
we are; we have taken their place, and shall be quite content for them
to keep out of the way, without caring when they went, or where they
have gone."

"But we must care," retorted Benedict testily; "why they have gone
concerns us a good deal; these juices make it evident, from the liquid
state in which we find them, that the ants were here this morning, they
have not only gone, but they have carried off their young larvae with
them; they have been sagacious enough to take warning of some impending
danger."

"Perhaps they heard that we were coming," said Hercules, laughing.

A look of withering scorn was the only answer that the entomologist
deigned to give.

"Yes, I say," repeated Hercules, "perhaps they heard that we were
coming."

"Pshaw!" said Benedict contemptuously; "do you imagine they would be
afraid of you? they would reduce your carcase to a skeleton in no time,
if they found it across their path."

"No doubt, if I were dead," replied Hercules, "they could pick my bones
pretty clean; but while I had the use of my limbs I think I could crush
them by thousands."

"Thousands!" ejaculated Benedict, with increasing warmth; "you think
you could demolish thousands; but what if they were hundreds of
thousands, millions, hundreds of millions? Alive as much as dead, I
tell you, they wouldn't be long in consuming every morsel of you."

During this brisk little discussion Dick Sands had been pondering over
what Benedict had said. There was no doubt that the amateur naturalist
was well acquainted with the habits of white ants, and if, as he
affirmed, the insects had instinctively quitted their abode on account
of some approaching danger, Dick asked himself whether it was safe or
prudent for his party to remain. But the fury of the storm was still so
great that all possibility of removing from the shelter seemed
precluded for the present, and, without inquiring farther into the
mystery, he merely said,

"Although the ants, Mr. Benedict, have left us their provisions, we
must not forget that we have brought our own. We will have our supper
now, and to-morrow, when the storm is over, we will see what is to be
done."

Fatigue had not taken away the appetite of the energetic travellers,
and they gladly set about the preparation of their meal. The
provisions, of which they had enough for another two days, had not been
injured by the rain. For some minutes the crunching of hard biscuit was
the only sound to be heard; Hercules, in particular, seemed to pound
away with his huge jaws as with a pair of millstones.

[Illustration: The naturalist now fairly mounted on a favourite hobby.]

Mrs. Weldon was the only one of the party who ate little; and that
little was only taken at Dick's earnest solicitation; he could not help
noticing, with much concern, that although Jack seemed to be
satisfactorily recovering, and, without sign of fever, was sleeping
calmly enough on a bed made up of clothes spread out in one of the
cells, yet his mother had lost much of her courage, and seemed
preoccupied and depressed.

Cousin Benedict did due honour to the simple evening repast; not on
account of its quantity or quality, but because it gave him an
opportunity of holding forth upon the subject of termites. He was much
vexed that he had been unable to discover a single specimen in the
deserted anthill with which he might illustrate his lecture, but
notwithstanding this deficiency he continued to talk, heedless whether
any one was listening.

"They are wonderful insects," he said; "they belong to the order of the
Neuroptera, which have the antennae longer than the head; their
mandibles are well-developed, and the inferior pair of wings is
generally as large as the superior. There are five families of them;
the Panorpide, the Myrmellonide, the Hemerobiide, the Termitine, and
the Perlide. I need hardly say that what we are now occupying is a
dwelling of the Termitine."

At this point Dick became all attention; he was anxious to ascertain
whether this discovery of white ants had aroused any suspicion in
Benedict's mind that they must be on African soil. The naturalist, now
fairly mounted on a favourite hobby, went on with his discourse.

"I am sorry not to have a specimen to show you, but these Termitine
have four joints in the tarsi, and strong horny mandibles. The family
includes, as genera, the Mantispa, the Raphidia, and the Termes, the
last commonly known as white ants, amongst which are 'Termes fatalis,
Termes lucifugans, Termes mordax,' and several others more or less
rare."

"And which of them built this ant-hill?" inquired Dick.

"The bellicosi!" replied Benedict, pronouncing the name with as much
pride as if he were eulogizing the Macedonians or some warlike nation
of antiquity. "Bellicosi," he continued, "are to be found of every
size. There is as much difference between the largest and the smallest
of them as there is between Hercules and a dwarf; the workers are about
one-fifth of an inch long; the soldiers, or fighting-ants, are half an
inch; whilst the males and females measure four fifths of an inch.
There is another curious species, called 'sirafoos,' which are about
half an inch long, and have pincers instead of mandibles, and heads
larger than their bodies, like sharks. In fact, if sharks and sirafoos
were placed in competition, I should be inclined to back the sharks."

"And where are these sirafoos most generally to be found?" said Dick
cautiously.

"In Africa, in the southern and central provinces. Africa may truly be
termed the land of ants. Livingstone, in the notes brought home by
Stanley, describes a battle which he was fortunate enough to witness
between an army of black ants and an army of red. The black ants, or
drivers, which are what the natives call sirafoos, got the best of it;
and the red ants, or 'tchoongoos,' after a very resolute defence, were
obliged to retire defeated, carrying their eggs and young ones with
them. Livingstone avows that he never saw the warlike instinct so
strongly developed as in these sirafoos; the stoutest man, the largest
animal, a lion or an elephant, quails before the grip of their
mandibles: no obstacle impedes their progress; no tree is too lofty for
them to scale, and they contrive to cross wide streams by forming their
own bodies into a kind of suspension bridge. Equally amazing are their
numbers; Du Chaillu, another African traveller, relates how it took
more than twelve hours for a column of ants to file pass him, without a
moment's pause in their march. These numbers, however cease to be so
surprising when it is explained that their fecundity is such that a
single female of the termites bellicosi has been estimated to produce
as many as sixty thousand eggs a day. These Neuroptera furnish the
natives with a favourite food, grilled ants being considered a great
delicacy."

"Have you ever tasted them?" asked Hercules, with a grin.

"Never," answered the naturalist; "but I am in hopes I shall have a
chance of doing so very soon."

"Surely you don't imagine yourself in Africa!" said Tom suddenly.

"Africa! no; why should I?" replied Benedict; "but, as I have already
seen a tzetsy in America, I do not despair of having the satisfaction
of discovering white ants there too. You do not know the sensation I
shall make in Europe when I publish my folio volume and its
illustrations."

It was evident that no inkling of the truth had yet entered poor
Benedict's brain, and it seemed likely that it would require
demonstration far more striking than any natural phenomena to undeceive
the minds of such of the party as were not already in possession of the
fatal secret.

Although it was nine o'clock, Cousin Benedict went on talking
incessantly, regardless of the fact that one by one his audience were
falling to sleep in their separate cells. Dick Sands did not sleep, but
neither did he interrupt the entomologist by farther questions;
Hercules kept up his attention longer than the rest, but at length he
too succumbed to weariness, and his eyes and ears were closed to all
external sights and sounds.

But endurance has limits, and at last Cousin Benedict, having worn
himself out, clambered up to the topmost cell of the cone, which he had
chosen for his dormitory, and fell into a peaceful slumber.

The lantern had been already extinguished. All was darkness and silence
within, whilst the storm without still raged with a violence that gave
no sign of abatement.

Dick Sands himself was the only one of the party who was not partaking
in the repose that was so indispensable to them all; but he could not
sleep; his every thought was absorbed in the responsibility that rested
on him to rescue those under his charge from the dangers that
threatened them. Again and again he recalled every incident that had
occurred since the loss of Captain Hull and his crew; he remembered the
occasion when he had stood with his pistol pointed at Negoro's head;
why, oh why, had his hand faltered then? why had he not at that moment
hurled the miserable wretch overboard, and thus relieved himself and
his partners in trouble from the catastrophe that had since befallen
them? Peril was still staring them in the face, and his sole drop of
consolation in the bitter cup of despondency was that Mrs. Weldon was
still ignorant of their real situation.

At that moment, just in the fever of his agony, he felt a light breath
upon his forehead; a hand was laid upon his shoulder, and a gentle
voice murmured in his ear,--

"My poor boy, I know everything. God will help us! His will be done!"

[Illustration: "My poor boy, I know everything."]




CHAPTER VI.

A DIVING-BELL.


This sudden revelation that Mrs. Weldon was acquainted with the true
state of things left Dick speechless. Even had he been capable of
replying, she gave him no opportunity, but immediately retired to the
side of her son. The various incidents of the march had all gradually
enlightened her, and perhaps the exclamation of Cousin Benedict on the
preceding evening had crowned them all; anyhow the brave lady now knew
the worst. Dick felt, however, that she did not despair; neither would
he.

He lay and longed for the dawn, when he hoped to explore the situation
better, and perchance to find the watercourse which he was convinced
could not be far distant. Moreover, he was extremely anxious to be out
of the reach of the natives whom, it was only too likely, Negoro and
Harris might be putting on their track.

But as yet no glimmer of daylight penetrated the aperture of the cone,
whilst the heavy rumblings, deadened as they were by the thickness of
the walls, made it certain that the storm was still raging with
undiminished fury. Attentively Dick listened, and he could distinctly
hear the rain beating around the base of the ant-hill; the heavy drops
splashed again as they fell, in a way altogether different to what they
would upon solid ground, so that he felt sure that the adjacent land
was by this time completely flooded. He was getting very drowsy when it
suddenly occurred to him that it was not unlikely the aperture was
getting blocked up with damp clay; in that case he knew that the breath
of the inmates would quickly vitiate the internal atmosphere. He crept
along the ground and had the satisfaction of finding that the clay
embankment was still perfectly dry; the orifice was quite unobstructed,
allowing not only a free passage to the air, but admitting the glare of
the occasional flashes of lightning, which the descending volumes of
water did not seem to stay.

Having thus far satisfied himself that all was well, and that there was
no immediate danger, Dick thought that he might now resign himself to
sleep as well as the rest: he took the precaution, however, of
stretching himself upon the embankment within easy reach of the
opening, and with his head supported against the wall, after a while
dozed off.

How long his light slumber had lasted he could not say, when he was
aroused by a sensation of cold. He started up, and to his horror
discovered that the water had entered the ant-hill and was rising
rapidly; it could not be long, he saw, before it reached the cells
which were occupied by Hercules and Tom. He woke them at once, and told
them what he had observed. The lantern was soon lighted, and they set
to work to ascertain what progress the water was making It rose for
about five feet, when it was found to remain stationary.

"What is the matter, Dick?" inquired Mrs. Weldon, disturbed by the
movements of the men.

"Nothing very alarming," answered Dick promptly; "only some water has
found its way into the lower part of the place; it will not reach your
upper cells; probably some river has overflowed its boundaries."

"The very river, perhaps," suggested Hercules assuringly, "that is to
carry us to the coast."

Mrs. Weldon made no reply.

Cousin Benedict was still sleeping as soundly as if he were himself a
white ant; the negroes were peering down on to the sheet of water which
reflected back the rays of the lantern, ready to carry out any orders
given by Dick, who was quietly gauging the inundation, and removing the
provisions and fire-arms out of its reach.

[Illustration: They set to work to ascertain what progress the water
was making.]

"Did the water get in at the opening, Mr. Dick?" asked Tom.

"Yes, Tom, and consequently we are coming to the end of our stock of
fresh air," was Dick's reply.

"But why should we not make another opening above the water level?" Tom
inquired.

"A thing to be thought about," said Dick; "but we have to remember that
if we have five feet of water here inside, there is probably a depth of
six or seven outside. In rising here the flood has compressed the air,
and made it an obstacle to further progress, but if we allow the air to
escape, we may perhaps only be letting the water rise too high for our
safety. We are just as if we were in a diving-bell."

"Then what is to be done?" asked the old negro.

"No doubt," replied Dick, "we must proceed very cautiously. An
inconsiderate step will jeopardize our lives." Dick Sands was quite
correct in comparing the cone to an immersed diving-bell. In that
mechanical contrivance, however, the air can always be renewed by means
of pumps, so that it can be occupied without inconvenience beyond what
is entailed by a somewhat confined atmosphere; but here the interior
space had already been reduced by a third part through the encroachment
of the water, and there was no method of communicating with the outer
air except by opening a new aperture, an operation in which there was
manifest danger.

Dick did not entertain the slightest apprehension that the ant-hill
would be carried away bodily by the inundation; he knew that it would
adhere to its base as firmly as a beaver-hut; what he really dreaded
was that the storm would last so long that the flood would rise high
above the plain, perhaps submerging the ant-hill entirely, so that
ultimately all air would be expelled by the persistent pressure.

The more he pondered the more he felt himself driven to the conviction
that the inundation would be wide and deep. It could not be, he felt
sure, entirely owing to the downpour from the clouds that the rapid
flood was rising; there must have been the sudden overflowing of some
stream to cause such a deluge over the low-lying plain. It could not be
proved that the ant hill was not already under water, so that escape
might be no longer possible, even from its highest point.

With all Dick's courage, it was yet evident that he was very uneasy; he
did not know what to do, and asked himself again and again whether
patient waiting or decisive action would be his more prudent course.

It was now about three o'clock in the morning. All within the ant-hill
were silent and motionless, listening to the incessant turmoil which
told that the strife of the elements had not yet ceased.

Presently, old Tom pointed out that the height of the water was
gradually increasing, but only by very slow ascent. Dick could only say
that if the flood continued to rise, however slowly, it must inevitably
drive out the air.

As if struck by a sudden thought, Bat called out,--

"Let me try and get outside. Perhaps I might dive and get through the
opening."

"I think I had better make that experiment myself," answered Dick.

"That you never shall," interposed Tom peremptorily; "you must let Bat
go. It may not be possible to get back, and your presence is
indispensable here. Think, sir, think of Mrs. Weldon, and Master Jack,"
he added in a lower tone.

"Well, well," Dick assented, "if it must be so, Bat shall go."

And turning to Bat, he continued,

"Do not try to come back again; we will try, if we can, to follow you
the same way; but if the top of the cone is still above water, knock
hard on it with your hatchet, and we shall take it as a signal that we
may break our way out. Do you understand?"

"All right!" he said, "all right, sir."

And after wringing his father's hand, he drew a long breath, and
plunged into the water that filled the lower section of the ant-hill.

It was an exploit that required considerable agility; the diver would
have to find the orifice, make his way through it, and, without loss of
a moment, let himself rise to the surface outside. Full half a minute
elapsed, and Dick was making sure that the negro had been successful in
his effort, when his black head emerged from the water. There was a
general exclamation of surprise.

"It is blocked up," gasped Bat, as soon as he had recovered breath
enough to speak.

"Blocked up?" cried Tom.

"Yes," Bat affirmed; "I have felt all round the wall very carefully
with my hand, and I am sure there is no hole left; I suppose the water
has dissolved the clay."

"If you cannot find a hole," exclaimed Hercules, "I can very soon make
one;" and he was just about to plunge his hatchet into the side of the
ant-hill, when Dick prevented him.

"Stop, stop! you must not be in such a hurry!"

He reflected for a few moments, and went on,--

"We must be cautious; an impetuous step may be destruction; perhaps the
water is over the top; if it is allowed to enter, then at once is an
end of all."

"But whatever we do," urged Tom, "must be done at once; there is no
time to lose."

He was right; the water had risen till it was quite six feet deep; none
but Mrs. Weldon, Jack, Nan, and Cousin Benedict, who were lodged in the
upper cells, were fairly above its surface.

Dick now came to his determination. At about a foot above the
water-level, that is, about seven feet from the ground, he resolved to
bore a hole through the clay. If he should find himself in
communication with the open air, he would have the proof he desired
that the top of the cone was still uncovered; if, on the other hand, he
should ascertain that he had pierced the wall below the surface of the
external water, he would be prepared to plug up the hole
instantaneously, and repeat the experiment higher up. It was true that
the inundation might have risen even fifteen feet above the plain; in
that case the worst had come, and there was no alternative but that
they must all die of asphyxia.

Carefully considering the chances of his undertaking, Dick calmly and
steadily set about his task. The best instrument that suggested itself
for his purpose was the ramrod of a gun, which, having a sort of
corkscrew at the end for extracting the wadding, would serve as an
auger. The hole would be very small, but yet large enough for the
requisite test. Hercules showed him all the light he could by holding
up the lantern. There were several candles left, so that they were not
in fear of being altogether in darkness.

The operation hardly took a minute; the ramrod passed through the clay
without difficulty; a muffled sound was distinguished as of air-bubbles
rushing through a column of water. As the air escaped, the water in the
cone rose perceptibly. The hole had been pierced too low. A handful of
clay was immediately forced into the orifice, which was thus
effectually plugged; and Dick turned round quietly, and said,--

"We must try again."

The water had again become stationary, but its last rise had diminished
the amount of breathing space by more than eight inches. The supply of
oxygen was beginning to fail, respiration was becoming difficult, and
the flame of the candle burned red and dim.

About a foot higher than the first hole, Dick now set about boring a
second. The experiment might again prove a failure, and the water rise
yet higher in the cone; but the risk must be run.

Just as the auger was being inserted, a loud exclamation of delight was
heard proceeding from Cousin Benedict's cell. Dick paused, and Hercules
turned the lantern towards the excited naturalist, who seemed beaming
with satisfaction.

"Yes, yes; I see it all well enough," he cried; "I know now why the
termites left their home; they were wide-awake; they were more clever
than we are; they knew that the storm was coming!"

Finding that this was all the worthy entomologist had to communicate,
Dick, without comment, turned back again to his operation. Again the
gurgling noise! again the water's upward rush! For the second time he
had failed to effect an aperture to the outer air!

[Illustration: All fired simultaneously at the nearest boat.]

The situation was to the last degree alarming. The water had all but
reached Mrs. Weldon, and she was obliged to take her boy into her arms.
Every one felt nearly stifled. A loud singing was heard in the ears,
and the lantern showed barely any light at all. A few minutes more and
the air would be incapable of supporting life. One chance alone
remained. They must bore another hole at the very summit of the cone.
Not that they were unaware of the imminent danger of this measure, for
if the ant-hill were really submerged the water from below would
immediately expel the remaining air and death must be instantaneous. A
few brief words from Dick explained the emergency of the crisis. Mrs.
Weldon recognized the necessity,--

"Yes, Dick, do it; there is nothing else to be done."

While she was speaking the light flickered out, and they were in total
darkness.

Mounted on the shoulders of Hercules, who was crouching in one of the
side-cells, his head only just above water, Dick proceeded to force the
ramrod into the clay, which at the vertex of the ant-hill was
considerably harder and thicker than elsewhere.

A strange mingling of hope and fear thrilled through Dick Sands as he
applied his hand to make the opening which was to admit life and air,
or the flood of death!

The silence of the general expectation was broken by the noise of a
sharp hissing; the water rose for eight inches, but all at once it
ceased to rise; it had found its level. No need this time to close the
orifice; the top of the ant-hill was higher than the top of the flood;
and for the present, at least, they could all rejoice that their lives
were spared!

A general cheer, led by the stentorian voice of Hercules, involuntarily
broke from the party; cutlasses were brought into action, and the clay
crumbled away beneath the vigorous assault that was made upon it. The
welcome air was admitted through the new-made aperture, bringing with
it the first rays of the rising sun. The summit of the ant-hill once
removed, it would be quite easy to clamber to the top, whence it was
hoped they would soon get away to some high ground out of reach of the
flood.

Dick was the first to mount the summit; but a cry of dismay burst from
his lips!

A sound only too well known to travellers in Africa broke upon his ear;
that sound was the whizzing of arrows.

Hardly a hundred yards away was a large encampment; whilst, in the
water, quite close to the ant-hill where he stood, he saw some long
boats full of natives. From one of these had come the volley of arrows
which had greeted his appearance above the opening of the cone.

To tell his people what had happened was the work of a moment. He
seized his gun, and made Hercules, Bat, and Actæon take theirs, and all
fired simultaneously at the nearest boat. Several of the natives were
seen to fall; but shouts of defiance were raised, and shots were fired
in return.

Resistance was manifestly useless. What could they do against a hundred
natives? they were assailed on every hand. In accordance with what
seemed a preconcerted plan, they were carried off from the ant-hill
with brutal violence, in two parties, without the chance of a farewell
word or sign.

Dick Sands saw that Mrs. Weldon, Jack, and Cousin Benedict were placed
on board one boat, and were conveyed towards the camp, whilst he
himself, with the five negroes and old Nan, was forced into another,
and taken in a different direction. Twenty natives formed a body-guard
around them, and five boats followed in their rear.

Useless though it were, Dick and the negroes made one desperate attempt
to maintain their freedom; they wounded several of their antagonists,
and would doubtless have paid their lives as a penalty for their
daring, if there had not been special orders given that they should be
taken alive.

The passage of the flood was soon accomplished. The boat had barely
touched the shore, when Hercules with a tremendous bound sprang on to
the land. Instantly two natives rushed upon him. The giant clave their
skulls with the butt end of his gun, and made off. Followed though he
was by a storm of bullets, he escaped in safety, and disappeared
beneath the cover of the woods.

[Illustration: The giant clave their skulls with the butt end of his
gun.]

Dick Sands and the others were guarded to the shore, and fettered like
slaves.




CHAPTER VII.

A SLAVE CARAVAN.


The storm of the previous night, by swelling the tributaries of the
Coanza, had caused the main river to overflow its banks. The inundation
had entirely changed the aspect of the country, transforming the plain
into a lake, where the peaks of a number of ant-hills were the sole
objects that emerged above the watery expanse.

The Coanza, which is one of the principal rivers of Angola, falls into
the Atlantic about a hundred miles from the spot at which the "Pilgrim"
was stranded. The stream, which a few years later was crossed by
Cameron on his way to Benguela, seems destined to become the chief
highway of traffic between Angola and the interior; steamers already
ply upon its lower waters, and probably ten years will not elapse
before they perform regular service along its entire course.

Dick Sands had been quite right in searching northwards for the
navigable stream he had been so anxious to find; the rivulet he had
been following fell into the Coanza scarce a mile away, and had it not
been for this unexpected attack he and his friends might reasonably
have hoped to descend the river upon a raft, until they reached one of
the Portuguese forts where steam vessels put in. But their fate was
ordered otherwise.

The camp which Dick had descried from the ant-hill was pitched upon an
eminence crowned by an enormous sycamore-fig, one of those giant trees
occasionally found in Central Africa, of which the spreading foliage
will shelter some five hundred men. Some of the non-fruit-bearing kind
of banyan-trees formed the background of the landscape.

Beneath the shelter of the sycamore, the caravan which had been
referred to in the conversation between Negoro and Harris had just made
a halt. Torn from their villages by the agents of the slave-dealer
Alvez, the large troop of natives was on its way to the market of
Kazonndé, thence to be sent as occasion required either to the west
coast, or to Nyangwé, in the great lake district, to be dispersed into
Upper Egypt or Zanzibar.

Immediately on reaching the camp, the four negroes and old Nan were
placed under precisely the same treatment as the rest of the captives.
In spite of a desperate resistance, they were deprived of their
weapons, and fastened two and two, one behind another, by means of a
pole about six feet long, forked at each end, and attached to their
necks by an iron bolt. Their arms were left free, that they might carry
any burdens, and in order to prevent an attempt to escape a heavy chain
was passed round their waists. It was thus in single file, unable to
turn either right or left, they would have to march hundreds of miles,
goaded along their toilsome road by the havildar's whip. The lot of
Hercules seemed preferable, exposed though undoubtedly he would be in
his flight to hunger, and to the attacks of wild beasts, and to all the
perils of that dreary country. But solitude, with its worst privations,
was a thing to be envied in comparison to being in the hands of those
pitiless drivers, who did not speak a word of the language of their
victims, but communicated with them only by threatening gestures or by
actual violence.

As a white man, Dick was not attached to any other captive. The drivers
were probably afraid to subject him to the same treatment as the
negroes, and he was left unfettered, but placed under the strict
surveillance of a havildar. At first he felt considerable surprise at
not seeing Harris or Negoro in the camp, as he could not entertain a
doubt that it was at their instigation the attack had been made upon
their retreat; but when he came to reflect that Mrs. Weldon, Jack, and
Cousin Benedict had not been allowed to come with them, but had been
carried off in some other direction, he began to think it probable that
the two rascals had some scheme to carry out with regard to them
elsewhere.

The caravan consisted of nearly eight hundred, including about five
hundred slaves of both sexes, two hundred soldiers and freebooters, and
a considerable number of havildars and drivers, over whom the agents
acted as superior officers.

These agents are usually of Portuguese or Arab extraction; and the
cruelties they inflict upon the miserable captives are almost beyond
conception; they beat them continually, and if any unfortunate slave
sinks from exhaustion, or in any way becomes unfit for the market, he
is forthwith either stabbed or shot. As the result of this brutality it
rarely happens that fifty per cent of the slaves reach their
destination; some few may contrive to escape, and many are left as
skeletons along the line of route.

Such of the agents as are Portuguese are (as it may well be imagined)
of the very lowest dregs of society, outlaws, escaped criminals, and
men of the most desperate character; of this stamp were the associates
of Negoro and Harris, now in the employ of José Antonio Alvez, one of
the most notorious of all the slave-dealers of Central Africa, and of
whom Commander Cameron has given some curious information.

Most frequently the soldiers who escort the captives are natives hired
by the dealers, but they do not possess the entire monopoly of the
forays made for the purpose of securing slaves; the native negro kings
make war upon each other with this express design, and sell their
vanquished antagonists, men, women, and children, to the traders for
calico, guns, gunpowder and red beads; or in times of famine, according
to Livingstone, even for a few grains of maize.

The escort of old Alvez' caravan was an average specimen of these
African soldiers. It was simply a horde of half-naked banditti,
carrying old flint-locked muskets, the barrels of which were decorated
with copper rings. The agents are very often put to their wits' end to
know how to manage them; their orders are called in question, halts are
continually demanded, and in order to avert desertion they are
frequently obliged to yield to the obstreperous will of their
undisciplined force.

Although the slaves, both male and female, are compelled to carry
burdens whilst on their march, a certain number of porters, called
_pagazis_, is specially engaged to carry the more valuable merchandize,
and principally the ivory. Tusks occasionally weigh as much as 160
lbs., and require two men to carry them to the dépôts, whence they are
sent to the markets of Khartoom, Natal, and Zanzibar. On their arrival
the _pagazis_ are paid by the dealers according to contract, which is
generally either by about twenty yards of the cotton stuff known as
_merikani_, or by a little powder, by a handful or two of cowries, by
some beads, or if all these be scarce, they are paid by being allotted
some of the slaves who are otherwise unsalable.

Among the five hundred slaves in the caravan, very few were at all
advanced in years. The explanation of this circumstance was that
whenever a raid is made, and a village is set on fire, every inhabitant
above the age of forty is mercilessly massacred or hung upon the
neighbouring trees; only the children and young adults of both sexes
are reserved for the market, and as these constitute only a small
proportion of the vanquished, some idea may be formed of the frightful
depopulation which these vast districts of Equinoctial Africa are
undergoing.

Nothing could be more pitiable than the condition of this miserable
herd. All alike were destitute of clothing, having nothing on them but
a few strips of the stuff known as _mbuza_, made from the bark of
trees; many of the women were covered with bleeding wounds from the
drivers' lashes, and had their feet lacerated by the constant friction
of the road, but in addition to other burdens were compelled to carry
their own emaciated children; young men, too, there were who had lost
their voices from exhaustion, and who, to use Livingstone's expression,
had been reduced to "ebony skeletons" by toiling under the yoke of the
fork, which is far more galling than the galley-chain. It was a sight
that might have moved the most stony-hearted, but yet there was no
symptom of compassion on the part of those Arab and Portuguese drivers
whom Cameron pronounces "worse than brutes."[1]


[Footnote 1: Cameron says, "In order to obtain the fifty women of whom
Alvez is the owner, ten villages, containing altogether a population of
not less than 1500, were totally destroyed. A few of the inhabitants
contrived to escape, but the majority either perished in the flames,
were slain in defending their families, or were killed by hunger or
wild beasts in the jungle.... The crimes which are perpetuated in
Africa, by men who call themselves Christians, seem incredible to the
inhabitants of civilized countries. It is impossible that the
government at Lisbon can be aware of the atrocities committed by those
who boast of being subject to her flag." _Tour du Monde_.

N.B.--Against these assertions of Cameron, loud protestations have been
made in Portugal.]


The guard over the prisoners was so strict that Dick Sands felt it
would be utterly useless for him to make any attempt to seek for Mrs.
Weldon. She and her son had doubtless been carried off by Negoro, and
his heart sank when he thought of the dangers to which too probably she
would be exposed. Again and again he repeated his reproaches on himself
that he had ever allowed either Negoro or Harris to escape his hands.
Neither Mrs. Weldon nor Jack could expect the least assistance from
Cousin Benedict; the good man was barely able to consult for himself.
All three of them would, he conjectured, be conveyed to some remote
district of Angola; the poor mother, like some miserable slave, would
insist upon carrying her own sick son until her strength failed her,
and, exhausted by her endurances, she sank down helpless on the way.

A prisoner, and powerless to help! the very thought was itself a
torture to poor Dick. Even Dingo was gone! It would have been a
satisfaction to have had the dog to send off upon the track of the lost
ones. One only hope remained. Hercules still was free. All that human
strength could attempt in Mrs. Weldon's behalf, Hercules would not fail
to try. Perhaps, too, under cover of the night, it was not altogether
improbable that the stalwart negro would mingle with the crowd of
negroes (amongst whom his dark skin would enable him to pass
unnoticed), and make his way to Dick himself; then might not the two
together elude the vigilance of the watch? might they not follow after
and overtake Mrs. Weldon in the forest? would they not perchance be
able either by stealth or by force to liberate her, and once free they
would effect an escape to the river, and finally accomplish the
undertaking in which they had been so lamentably frustrated. Such were
the sanguine visions in which Dick permitted himself to indulge; his
temperament overcame all tendency to despair, and kept him alive to the
faintest chance of deliverance.

The next thing of importance was to ascertain the destination of the
caravan. It was a matter of the most serious moment whether the convoy
of slaves were going to be carried to one of the dépôts of Angola, or
whether they were to be sent hundreds of miles into the interior to
Nyangwe, in the heart of the great lake district that Livingstone was
then exploring. To reach the latter spot would occupy some months, and
to return thence to the coast, even if they should be fortunate enough
to regain their liberty, would be a work of insuperable difficulty.

He was not long left in suspense. Although he could not understand the
half-African, half-Arab dialect that was used by the leaders of the
caravan, he noticed that the word Kazonndé occurred very frequently,
and knowing it as the name of an important market in the province, he
naturally concluded that it was there the slaves were to be disposed
of; whether for the advantage of the king of the district, or of one of
the rich traders, he had no means of telling. Unless his geographical
knowledge was at fault, he was aware that Kazonndé must be about 400
miles from S. Paul de Loanda, and consequently that it could hardly be
more than 250 miles from the part of the Coanza where they were now
encamped. Under favourable circumstances it was a journey that could
not be accomplished in less than twelve or fourteen days, but allowing
for the retarded progress of a caravan already exhausted by a
lengthened march, Dick was convinced that they could not reach the
place for at least three weeks.

He was most anxious to communicate to his companions in adversity his
impression that they were not to be carried into the heart of the
country, and began to cogitate whether some plan could not be devised
for exchanging a few words with them.

Forked together, as it has been said, two and two, the four negroes
were at the right-hand extremity of the camp; Bat attached to his
father, Austin to Actæon. A havildar, with twelve soldiers, formed
their guard. Dick, at first, was about fifty yards away from the group,
but being left free to move about, contrived gradually to diminish the
distance between himself and them. Tom seemed to apprehend his
intention, and whispered a word to his companions that they should be
on the look-out. Without moving they were all on their guard in a
moment. Dick, careful to conceal his design, strolled backward with a
feigned indifference, and succeeded in getting so near that he might
have called out and informed Tom that they were going to Kazonndé. But
he was desirous of accomplishing more than this; he wanted to get an
opportunity of having some conversation as to their future plans, and
he ventured to approach still nearer. His heart beat high as he
believed he was on the point of attaining his object, when all at once
the havildar, becoming aware of his design, rushed upon him like a
madman, summoned some soldiers, and with considerable violence sent him
back to the front. Tom and the others were quickly removed to another
part of the encampment.

Exasperated by the rough attack that was made upon him, Dick had seized
the havildar's gun and broken it, almost wrenching it from his hands,
when several soldiers simultaneously assailed him, and would have
struck him down and killed him upon the spot, had not one of the
chiefs, an Arab of huge stature and ferocious countenance, interfered
to stop them.

This Arab was the Ibn Hamish of whom Harris had spoken to Negoro. He
said a few words which Dick could not understand, and the soldiers,
with manifest reluctance, relaxed their hold and retired. It was
evident that although Dick was not to be permitted to hold any
communication with the rest of his party, orders had been given that
his life was to be protected.

[Illustration: The start was made.]

It was now nine o'clock, and the beating of drums and the blowing of
coodoo[1] horns gave the signal that the morning march was to be
continued. Instantly chiefs, soldiers, porters, and slaves were upon
their feet, and arranged themselves in their various groups with a
havildar bearing a bright-coloured banner at their head.


[Footnote: Coodoo, a ruminant common in Africa.]


The order was given; the start was made. A strange song was heard
rising in the air. It was a song, not of the victors, but of the
vanquished. The slaves were chanting an imprecation on their
oppressors; and the burden of the chorus was that captured, tortured,
slain--after death they would return and avenge their wrongs upon their
murderers!




CHAPTER VIII.

NOTES BY THE WAY.


The storm of the preceding evening had now passed away, but the sky was
still cloudy and the weather far from settled. It was the 19th of
April, the time of the _masika_, or second period of the rainy season,
so that for the next two or three weeks the nights might be expected to
be wet.

On leaving the banks of the Coanza the caravan proceeded due east.
Soldiers marched at the head and in the rear, as well as upon the
flanks of the troop; any escape of the prisoners, therefore, even if
they had not been loaded with their fetters, would have been utterly
impossible. They were all driven along without any attempt at order,
the havildars using their whips unsparingly upon them whenever they
showed signs of flagging. Some poor mothers could be seen carrying two
infants, one on each arm, whilst others led by the hand naked children,
whose feet were sorely cut by the rough ground over which they had trod.

Ibn Hamish, the Arab who had interfered between Dick and the havildar,
acted as commander to the caravan, and was here, there, and everywhere;
not moved in the least by the sufferings of the captives, but obliged
to be attentive to the importunities of the soldiers and porters, who
were perpetually clamouring for extra rations, or demanding an
immediate halt. Loud were the discussions that arose, and the uproar
became positively deafening when the quarrelsome voices rose above the
shrieks of the slaves, many of whom found themselves treading upon soil
already stained by the blood of the ranks in front.

[Illustration: If ever the havildar strolled a few yards away, Bat took
the opportunity of murmuring a few words of encouragement to this poor
old father.]

No chance again opened for Dick to get any communication with his
friends, who had been sent to the van of the procession. Urged on by
the whip they continued to march in single file, their heads in the
heavy forks. If ever the havildar strolled a few yards away, Bat took
the opportunity of murmuring a few words of encouragement to his poor
old father, while he tried to pick out the easiest path for him, and to
relax the pace to suit his enfeebled limbs. Large tears rolled down old
Tom's cheeks when he found that his son's efforts only resulted in
bringing down upon his back some sharp cuts of the havildar's whip.
Actæon and Austin, subject to hardly less brutality, followed a few
steps behind, but all four could not help feeling envious at the luck
of Hercules, who might have dangers to encounter, but at least had his
liberty.

Immediately upon their capture, Tom had revealed to his companions the
fact that they were in Africa, and informing them how they had been
betrayed by Harris, made them understand that they had no mercy to
expect.

Old Nan had been placed amongst a group of women in the central ranks.
She was chained to a young mother with two children, the one at the
breast, the other only three years old, and scarcely able to walk.
Moved by compassion, Nan took the little one into her own arms, thus
not only saving it from fatigue, but from the blows it would very
likely have received for lagging behind. The mother shed tears of
gratitude, but the weight was almost too much for Nan's strength, and
she felt as if she must break down under her self-imposed burden. She
thought fondly of little Jack, and imagining him borne along in the
arms of his weary mother, could not help asking herself whether she
should ever see him or her kind mistress again.

Far in the rear, Dick could not see the head of the caravan except
occasionally, when the ground was rather on the rise. The voices of the
agents and drivers, harsh and excited as they were, scarcely roused him
from his melancholy reflections. His thoughts were not of himself nor
of his own sufferings; his whole attention was absorbed in looking for
some traces of Mrs. Weldon's progress; if she, too, was being taken to
Kazonndé, her route must also lie this way. But he could discover no
trace of her having been conducted by this line of march, and could
only hope that she was being spared the cruelties which he was himself
witnessing.

The forest extended for about twenty miles to the east of the Coanza,
but whether it was that the trees had been destroyed by the ravages of
insects, or broken down before they had made their growth by being
trampled on by elephants, they were growing much less thickly than in
the immediate vicinity of the river. There were numbers of
cotton-trees, seven or eight feet high, from which are manufactured the
black-and-white striped stuffs that are worn in the interior of the
province; but, upon the whole, progress was not much impeded either by
shrubs or underwood. Occasionally the caravan plunged into jungles of
reeds like bamboos, their stalks an inch in diameter, so tall that only
an elephant or giraffe could have reared above them, and through which
none excepting such as had a very intimate knowledge of the country
could possibly have made their way.

Starting every morning at daybreak they marched till noon, when an
hour's halt was made. Packets of manioc were then unfastened, and doled
out in sparing quantities among the slaves; sometimes, when the
soldiers had plundered some village, a little goat's flesh or some
sweet potatoes were added to the meal; but generally the fatigue,
aggravated by inadequate rest, took away the appetite, and when
meal-time arrived many of the slaves could hardly eat at all. During
the first eight days' march from the Coanza no less than twenty
unfortunate wretches had fallen upon the road, and had been left
behind, a prey to the lions, panthers, and leopards that prowled in the
wake. As Dick heard their roars in the stillness of the night, he
trembled as he thought of Hercules. Nevertheless, had the opportunity
offered itself, he would not for a moment have hesitated in making his
own escape to the wilderness.

[Illustration: The caravan had been attacked on the flank by a dozen or
more crocodiles.]

The two hundred and fifty miles between the river and Kazonndé were
accomplished in what the traders call marches of ten miles each,
including the halts at night and midday. The journey cannot be better
described than by a few rough notes that Dick Sands made upon his way.

_April 25th_.--Saw a village surrounded with bamboo palisading, eight
or nine feet high. Fields round planted with maize, beans, and sorghum.
Two negroes captured, fifteen killed, rest took to flight.

_26th_.--Crossed a torrent 150 yards wide. Bridge formed of trunks of
trees and creepers. Piles nearly gave way; two women fastened to a
fork; one of them, carrying a baby, fell into the water. Water quickly
tinged with blood; crocodiles seen under bridge; risk of stepping into
their very jaws.

_28th_.--Crossed a forest of bauhinias; great trees, the iron-wood of
the Portuguese. Heavy rain; ground sodden; marching difficult. Caught
sight of Nan in the middle of caravan; she was toiling along with a
black child in her arms; the woman with her limping, and blood
trickling from her shoulder.

_29th_.--Camp at night under a huge baobab, with white flowers and
light green leaves. Lions and leopards roaring all night. A soldier
fired at a panther. What has become of Hercules?

_30th_.--Rainy season said to be over till November. First touch of
African winter. Dew very heavy. Plains all flooded. Easterly winds:
difficulty of respiration; susceptibility to fever. No trace of Mrs.
Weldon; cannot tell whether she is ahead. Fear Jack may have a return
of fever.

_May 5th_.--Forced to march several stages across flooded plains, water
up to the waist; many leeches sticking to the skin. Lotus and papyrus
upon higher ground. Great heavy leaves, like cabbages, beneath the
water, make many stumble as they walk. Saw large numbers of little
fish, silurus-species; these are caught by the natives, and sold to the
caravans.

_7th_.--Plain still inundated. Last night, no halting-place to be
found. Marched on through the darkness. Great misery. Except for Mrs.
Weldon, life not worth having; for her sake must hold out. Loud cries
heard. Saw, by the lightning, soldiers breaking large boughs from the
resinous trees that emerged from the water. The caravan had been
attacked on the flank by a dozen or more crocodiles; women and children
seized and carried off to what Livingstone calls their "pasture-lands,"
the holes where they deposit their prey until it is decomposed. Myself
grazed by the scales of one of them. A slave close beside me torn out
of the fork, which was snapped in half. How the poor fellow's cry of
agony rings in my ear! This morning, twenty missing. Tom and the
others, thank God! are still alive. They are on in front. Once Bat made
a sharp turn, and Tom caught sight of me. Nothing to be seen of Nan;
was she, poor creature, one of those that the crocodiles had got?

_8th_.--After twenty-four hours in the water we have crossed the plain.
We have halted on a hill. The sun helps to dry us. Nothing to eat
except a little manioc and a few handfuls of maize. Only muddy water to
drink. Impossible for Mrs. Weldon to survive these hardships; I hope
from my heart that she has been taken some other way. Small-pox has
broken out in the caravan; those that have it are to be left behind.

_9th_.--Started at dawn. No stragglers allowed; sick and weary must be
kept together by havildars' whip; the losses were considerable. Living
skeletons all round. Rejoiced once more to catch sight of Nan. She was
not carrying the child any longer; she was alone; the chain was round
her waist, but she had the loose end thrown over her shoulder. I got
close to her; suppose I am altered, as she did not know me. After I had
called her by name several times she stared at me, and at last said,
"Ah, Mr. Dick, is it you? you will not see me here much longer." Her
cadaverous look pained my very soul, but I tried to speak hopefully.
Poor Nan shook her head. "I shall never see my dear mistress again; no,
nor master Jack; I shall soon die." Anxious to help her, I would gladly
have carried the end of the chain which she had been obliged to bear
because her fellow-prisoner was dead. A rough hand was soon upon my
shoulder; a cruel lash had made Nan retreat to the general crowd,
whilst, at the bidding of an Arab chief, I was hustled back to the very
hindmost rank of the procession. I overheard the word Negoro, in a way
that convinced me that it is under the direction of the Portuguese that
I am subject to this hard indignity.

[Illustration: [**no caption, or it is cut off]]

_11th_.--Last night encamped under some large trees on the skirts of a
forest. Several escaped prisoners recaptured; their punishment
barbarously cruel. Loud roaring of lions and hyenas heard at nightfall,
also snorting of hippopotamuses; probably some lake or water-course not
far off. Tired, but could not sleep; heard a rustling in the grass;
felt sure that something was going to attack me; what could I do? I had
no gun. For Mrs. Weldon's sake, must, if possible, preserve my life.
The night was dark; no moon; two eyes gleamed upon me; I was about to
utter a cry of alarm; fortunately, I suppressed it; the creature that
had sprung to my feet was Dingo! The dog licked my hands all over,
persisting in rubbing his neck against them, evidently to make me feel
there; found a reed fastened to the well-known collar upon which the
initials S.V. had so often awakened our curiosity; breaking open the
reed, I took a note from inside; it was too dark for me to see to read
it. I tried, by caressing Dingo, to detain him; but the dog appeared to
know that his mission with me was at an end; he licked my hands
affectionately, made a sudden bound, and disappeared in the long grass
as mysteriously as he had come. The howling of the wild beasts
increased. How I dreaded that the faithful creature would become their
prey! No more sleep this night for me. It seemed that daylight would
never dawn; at length it broke with the suddenness that marks a
tropical morn. I was able cautiously to read my note; the handwriting,
I knew at a glance, was that of Hercules; there were but a few lines in
pencil:--

"Mrs. Weldon and Jack carried away in a kitanda.

"Harris and Negoro both with them. Mr. Benedict too. Only a few marches
ahead, but cannot be communicated with at present. Found Dingo wounded
by a gun-shot. Dear Mr. Dick, do not despair; keep up your courage. I
may help you yet.

"Your ever true and faithful

"HERCULES."

As far as it went, this intelligence was satisfactory. A kitanda, I
know, is a kind of litter made of dry grass, protected by a curtain,
and carried on the shoulders of two men by a long bamboo. What a relief
to know that Mrs. Weldon and Jack have been spared the miseries of this
dreadful march! May I not indulge the hope of seeing them at Kazonndé?

_12th_.--The prisoners getting more and more weary and worn out.
Blood-stains on the way still more conspicuous. Many poor wretches are
a mass of wounds. One poor woman for two days has carried her dead
child, from which she refuses to be parted.

_16th_.--Small-pox raging; the road strewn with corpses. Still ten days
before we reach Kazonndé. Just passed a tree from which slaves who had
died from hunger were hanging by the neck.

_18th_.--Must not give in, but I am almost exhausted. Rains have
ceased. We are to make what the dealers call _trikesa_, extra marches
in the after-part of the day. Road very steep; runs through _nyassi_,
tall grass of which the stalks scratch my face, and the seeds get under
my tattered clothes and make my skin smart painfully. My boots
fortunately are thick, and have not worn out. More slaves sick and
abandoned to take their chance. Provisions running very short; soldiers
and pagazis must be satisfied, otherwise they desert; consequently the
slaves are all but starved. "They can eat each other," say the agents.
A young slave, apparently in good health, dropped down dead. It made me
think of Livingstone's description of how free-born men, reduced to
slavery, will suddenly press their hand on their side, and die of a
broken heart.

[Illustration: More slaves sick, and abandoned to take their chance.]

_24th_.--Twenty captives, incapable any longer of keeping pace with the
rest, put to death by the havildars, the Arab chief offering no
opposition. Poor old Nan one of the victims of this horrible butchery.
My foot struck her corpse as I passed, but I was not permitted to give
her a decent burial. Poor old Nan! the first of the survivors of the
"Pilgrim" to go to her long rest! Poor old Nan!

Every night I watch for Dingo; but he never comes. Has Hercules nothing
more to communicate? or has any mishap befallen him? If he is alive he
will do what mortal strength can do to aid us.




CHAPTER IX.

KAZONNDÉ.


By the 26th of May, when the caravan reached Kazonndé the number of the
slaves had diminished by more than half, so numerous had been the
casualties along the road. But the dealers were quite prepared to make
a market of their loss; the demand for slaves was very great, and the
price must be raised accordingly.

Angola at that time was the scene of a large negro-traffic, and as the
caravans principally wended their way towards the interior, the
Portuguese authorities at Loanda and Benguela had practically no power
to prevent it. The barracks on the shore were crowded to overflowing
with prisoners, the few slave-ships that managed to elude the cruisers
being quite inadequate to embark the whole number for the Spanish
colonies to America.

Kazonndé, the point whence the caravans diverge to the various parts of
the lake district, is situated three miles from the mouth of the
Coanza, and is one of the most important _lakonis_, or markets of the
province. The open marketplace where the slaves are exposed for sale is
called the _chitoka_.

All the larger towns of Central Africa are divided into two distinct
parts; one occupied by the Arab, Portuguese, or native merchants, and
containing their slave-barracks; the other being the residence of the
negro king, often a fierce drunken potentate, whose rule is a reign of
terror, and who lives by subsidies allowed him by the traders.

The commercial quarter of Kazonndé now belonged to José Antonio Alvez.
It was his largest dépôt, although he had another at Bihé, and a third
at Cassangé, where Cameron subsequently met him. It consisted of one
long street, on each side of which were groups of flat-roofed houses
called _tembés_, built of rough earth, and provided with square yards
for cattle. The end of it opened into the _chitoka_, which was
surrounded by the barracks. Above the houses some fine banyan-trees
waved their branches, surmounted here and there by the crests of
graceful palms. There was at least a score of birds of prey that
hovered about the streets, and came down to perform the office of
public scavengers. At no great distance flowed the Loohi, a river not
yet explored, but which is supposed to be an affluent or sub-affluent
of the Congo.

[Illustration: Adjoining the commercial quarter was the royal
residence.]

Adjoining the commercial quarter was the royal residence, nothing more
nor less than a collection of dirty huts, extending over an area of
nearly a square mile.

Some of these huts were unenclosed; others were surrounded by a
palisade of reeds, or by a hedge of bushy figs.

In an enclosure within a papyrus fence were about thirty huts
appropriated to the king's slaves, another group for his wives, and in
the middle, almost hidden by a plantation of manioc, a _tembé_ larger
and loftier than the rest, the abode of the monarch himself.

He had sorely declined from the dignity and importance of his
predecessors, and his army, which by the early Portuguese traders had
been estimated at 20,000, now numbered less than 4000 men; no longer
could he afford, as in the good old time, to order a sacrifice of
twenty-five or thirty slaves at one offering.

His name was Moené Loonga. Little over fifty, he was prematurely aged
by drink and debauchery, and scarcely better than a maniac. His
subjects, officers, and ministers, were all liable to be mutilated at
his pleasure, and noses and ears, feet and hands, were cut off
unsparingly whenever his caprice so willed it. His death would have
been a cause of regret to no one, with the exception, perhaps, of
Alvez, who was on very good terms with him. Alvez, moreover, feared
that in the event of the present king's death, the succession of his
chief wife, Queen Moena, might be disputed, and that his dominions
would be invaded by a younger and more active neighbour, one of the
kings of Ukusu, who had already seized upon some villages dependent on
the government of Kazonndé, and who was in alliance with a rival trader
named Tipo-Tipo, a man of pure Arab extraction, from whom Cameron
afterwards received a visit at Nyangwé.

To all intents and purposes Alvez was the real sovereign of the
district, having fostered the vices of the brutalized king till he had
him completely in his power. He was a man considerably advanced in
years; he was not (as his name might imply) a white man, but had merely
assumed his Portuguese title for purposes of business; his true name
was Kendélé, and he was a pure negro by birth, being a native of Dondo
on the Coanza. He had commenced life as a slave-dealer's agent, and was
now on his way towards becoming a first-class trader; that is to say,
he was a consummate rascal under the guise of an honest man. He it was
whom Cameron met at the end of 1874 at Kilemba, the capital of Urua, of
which Kasongo is chief, and with whose caravan he travelled to Bihé, a
distance of seven hundred miles.

It was midday when the caravan entered Kazonndé. The journey from the
Coanza had lasted thirty-eight days, more than five weeks of misery as
great as was within human power to endure. Amidst the noise of drums
and coodoo-horns the slaves were conducted to the marketplace. The
soldiers of the caravan discharged their guns into the air, and old
Alvez' resident retinue responded with a similar salute. The bandits,
than which the soldiers were nothing better, were delighted to meet
again, and would celebrate their return by a season of riot and excess.

The slaves, reduced to a total of about two hundred and fifty, were
many of them almost dead from exhaustion; the forks were removed from
their necks, though the chains were still retained, and the whole of
them were driven into barracks that were unfit even for cattle, to
await (in company with 1200 to 1500 other captives already there) the
great market which would be held two days hence.

The _pagazis_, after delivering their loads of ivory, would only stay
to receive their payment of a few yards of calico or other stuff, and
would then depart at once to join some other caravan.

On being relieved from the forks which they had carried for so many
weary days, Tom and his companions heartily wrung each other's hands,
but they could not venture to utter one word of mutual encouragement.
The three younger men, more full of life and vigour, had resisted the
effects of the fatigue, but poor old Tom was nearly exhausted, and had
the march been protracted for a few more days he must have shared Nan's
fate and been left behind, a prey to the wild beasts.

Upon their arrival all four were packed into a narrow cell, where some
food was provided, and the door was immediately locked upon them.

The _chitoka_ was now almost deserted, and Dick Sands was left there
under the special charge of a havildar: he lost no opportunity of
peering into every hut in the hope of catching a glimpse of Mrs.
Weldon, who, if Hercules had not misinformed him, had come on hither
just in front.

But he was very much perplexed. He could well understand that Mrs.
Weldon, if still a prisoner, would be kept out of sight, but why Negoro
and Harris did not appear to triumph over him in his humiliation was
quite a mystery to him. It was likely enough that the presence of
either one or the other of them would be the signal for himself to be
exposed to fresh indignity, or even to torture, but Dick would have
welcomed the sight of them at Kazonndé, were it only as an indication
that Mrs. Weldon and Jack were there also.

It disappointed him, too, that Dingo did not come back. Ever since the
dog had brought him the first note, he had kept an answer written ready
to send to Hercules, imploring him to look after Mrs. Weldon, and to
keep him informed of everything. He began to fear that the faithful
creature must be dead, perhaps perished in some attempt to reach
himself; it was, however, quite possible that Hercules had taken the
dog in some other direction, hoping to gain somedépôt in the interior.

But so thoroughly had Dick persuaded himself that Mrs. Weldon had
preceded him to Kazonndé that his disappointment became more and more
keen when he failed to discover her. For a while he seemed to yield to
despair, and sat down sorrowful and sick at heart.

Suddenly a chorus of voices and trumpets broke upon his ear; he was
startled into taking a new interest in what was going on.

"Alvez! Alvez!" was the cry again and again repeated by the crowd.

Here, then, was the great man himself about to appear. Was it not
likely that Harris or Negoro might be with him?

Dick stood erect and resolute, his eye vivid with expectation; he felt
all eagerness to stand face to face with his betrayers; boy as he was,
he was equal to cope with them both.

The _kitanda_, which came in sight at the end of the street, was
nothing more than a kind of hammock covered by a faded and ragged
curtain. An old negro stepped out of it. His attendants greeted him
with noisy acclamations.

This, then, was the great trader, José Antonio Alvez.

Immediately following him was his friend Coïmbra, son of the chief
Coïmbra of Bihé, and, according to Cameron, the greatest blackguard in
the province. This sworn ally of Alvez, this organizer of his
slave-raids, this commander, worthy of his own horde of bandits, was
utterly loathsome in his appearance, his flesh was filthily dirty, his
eyes were bloodshot, his skin yellow, and his long hair all
dishevelled. He had no other attire than a tattered shirt, a tunic made
of grass, and a battered straw hat, under which his countenance
appeared like that of some old hag.

Alvez himself, whose clothes were like those of an old Turk the day
after a carnival, was one degree more respectable in appearance than
his satellite, not that his looks spoke much for the very highest class
of African slave-dealers. To Dick's great disappointment, neither
Harris nor Negoro was among his retinue.

Both Alvez and Coïmbra shook hands with Ibn Hamish, the leader of the
caravan, and congratulated him on the success of the expedition. Alvez
made a grimace on being told that half the slaves had died on the way,
but on the whole he seemed satisfied; he could meet the demand that at
present existed, and would lose no time in bartering the new arrival
for ivory or _hannas_, copper in the shape of a St. Andrew's cross, the
form in which the metal is exported in Central Africa.

After complimenting the havildars upon the way in which they had done
their work, the trader gave orders that the porters should be paid and
dismissed. The conversations were carried on in a mixture of Portuguese
and native idioms, in which the African element abounded so largely
that a native of Lisbon would have been at a loss to understand them.
Dick, of course, could not comprehend what was said, and it was only
when he saw a havildar go towards the cell in which Tom and the others
were confined, that he realized that the talk was about himself and his
party.

When the negroes were brought out, Dick came close up, being anxious to
learn as much as he could of what was in contemplation. The old
trader's eyes seemed to brighten as he glanced upon the three strapping
young men who, he knew, would soon be restored to their full strength
by rest and proper food. They at least would get a good price; as for
poor old Tom, he was manifestly so broken down by infirmity and age,
that he would have no value in the market.

In a few words of broken English, which Alvez had picked up from some
of his agents, he ironically gave them all a welcome.

"Glad to see you!" he said, with a diabolical grin.

Tom knew what he meant, and drew himself up proudly.

"We are free men!" he protested, "free citizens of the United States!"

"Yes, yes!" replied Alvez, grinning, "you are Americans; very glad to
see you!"

"Very glad to see you!" echoed Coïmbra, and walking up to Austin he
felt his chest and shoulders, and then proceeded to open his mouth in
order to examine his teeth.

A blow from Austin's powerful fist sent the satellite staggering
backwards.

Some soldiers made a dash and seized the young negro, evidently ready
to make him pay dearly for his temerity; but Alvez was by no means
willing to have any injury done to his newly-acquired property, and
called them off. He hardly attempted to conceal his amusement at
Coïmbra's discomfiture, although the blow had cost him one of his front
teeth.

After he had recovered somewhat from the shock, Coïmbra stood scowling
at Austin, as if mentally vowing vengeance on some future occasion.

Dick Sands was now himself brought forward in the custody of a
havildar. It was clear that Alvez had been told all about him, for
after scanning him for a moment, he stammered out in his broken
English,--

"Ah! ah! the little Yankee!"

"Yes," replied Dick; "I see you know who I am. What are you going to do
with me and my friends?"

"Yankee! little Yankee!" repeated the trader, who either did not or
would not comprehend the meaning of Dick's question.

Dick turned to Coïmbra and made the same inquiry of him; in spite of
his degraded features, now still farther disfigured by being swollen
from the blow, it was easy to recognize that he was not of native
origin. He refused to answer a word, and only stared again with the
vicious glare of malevolence.

Meanwhile, Alvez had begun to talk to Ibn Hamish. Dick felt sure that
they intended to separate him from the negroes, and accordingly took
the opportunity of whispering a few words to them.

"My friends, I have heard from Hercules. Dingo brought me a note from
him, tied round his neck. He says Harris and Negoro have carried off
Mrs. Weldon, Jack, and Mr. Benedict. He did not know where. Have
patience, and we will find them yet."

[Illustration: With a yell and a curse, the American fell dead at his
feet.]

"And where's Nan?" muttered Tom, in a low voice.

"Dead," replied Dick, and was about to add more, when a hand was laid
upon his shoulder, and a voice that he knew too well exclaimed,--

"Well, my young friend, how are you? I am glad to see you again."

He turned round quickly. Harris stood before him.

"Where is Mrs. Weldon?" asked Dick impetuously.

"Ah, poor thing!" answered Harris, with an air of deep commiseration.

"What! is she dead?" Dick almost shrieked; "where is her child?"

"Poor little fellow!" said Harris, in the same mournful tone.

These insinuations, that those in whose welfare he was so deeply
interested had succumbed to the hardships of the journey, awoke in
Dick's mind a sudden and irresistible desire for vengeance. Darting
forwards he seized the cutlass that Harris wore in his belt, and
plunged it into his heart.

With a yell and a curse, the American fell dead at his feet.




CHAPTER X.

MARKET-DAY.


So sudden was Dick's action that it had been impossible to parry his
blow. Several of the natives rushed on him, and in all likelihood would
have struck him down upon the spot had not Negoro arrived at that very
moment. At a sign from him the natives drew back, and proceeded to
raise and carry away Harris's corpse.

Alvez and Coïmbra were urgent in their demand that Dick should
forthwith be punished by death, but Negoro whispered to them that they
would assuredly be the gainers by delay, and they accordingly contented
themselves with ordering the youth to be placed under strict
supervision.

This was the first time that Dick had set eyes upon Negoro since he had
left the coast; nevertheless, so heartbroken was he at the intelligence
he had just received, that he did not deign to address a word to the
man whom he knew to be the real author of all his misery. He cared not
now what became of him.

Loaded with chains, he was placed in the dungeon where Alvez was
accustomed to confine slaves who had been condemned to death for mutiny
or violence. That he had no communication with the outer world gave him
no concern; he had avenged the death of those for whose safety he had
felt himself responsible, and could now calmly await the fate which he
could not doubt was in store for him; he did not dare to suppose that
he had been temporarily spared otherwise than that he might suffer the
cruellest tortures that native ingenuity could devise. That the
"Pilgrim's" cook now held in his power the boy captain he so thoroughly
hated was warrant enough that the sternest possible measure of
vengeance would be exacted.

[Illustration: Accompanied by Coïmbra, Alvez himself was one of the
first arrivals.]

Two days later, the great market, the _lakoni_, commenced. Although
many of the principal traders were there from the interior, it was by
no means exclusively a slave-mart; a considerable proportion of the
natives from the neighbouring provinces assembled to dispose of the
various products of the country.

Quite early the great _chitoka_ of Kazonndé was all alive with a
bustling concourse of little under five thousand people, including the
slaves of old Alvez, amongst whom were Tom and his three partners in
adversity--an item by no means inconsiderable in the dealer's stock.

Accompanied by Coïmbra, Alvez himself was one of the first arrivals. He
was going to sell his slaves in lots to be conveyed in caravans into
the interior. The dealers for the most part consisted of half-breeds
from Ujiji, the principal market on Lake Tanganyika, whilst some of a
superior class were manifestly Arabs.

The natives that were assembled were of both sexes, and of every
variety of age, the women in particular displaying an aptitude in
making bargains that is shared by their sisters elsewhere of a lighter
hue; and it may be said that no market of the most civilized region
could be characterized by greater excitement or animation, for amongst
the savages of Africa the customer makes his offer in equally noisy
terms as the vendor.

The _lakoni_ was always considered a kind of fète-day; consequently the
natives of both sexes, though their clothing was scanty in extent, made
a point of appearing in a most lavish display of ornaments. Their
head-gear was most remarkable. The men had their hair arranged in every
variety of eccentric device; some had it divided into four parts,
rolled over cushions and fastened into a chignon, or mounted in front
into a bunch of tails adorned with red feathers; others plastered it
thickly with a mixture of red mud and oil similar to that used for
greasing machinery, and formed it into cones or lumps, into which they
inserted a medley of iron pins and ivory skewers; whilst the greatest
dandies had a glass bead threaded upon every single hair, the whole
being fastened together by a tattooing-knife driven through the
glittering mass.

As a general rule, the women preferred dressing their hair in little
tufts about the size of a cherry, arranging it into the shape of a cap,
with corkscrew ringlets on each side of the face. Some wore it simply
hanging down their backs, others in French fashion, with a fringe
across the forehead; but every _coiffure_, without exception, was
daubed and caked either with the mixture of mud and grease, or with a
bright red extract of sandal-wood called _nkola_.

But it was not only on their heads that they made this extraordinary
display of ornaments; the lobes of their ears were loaded till they
reached their shoulders with a profusion of wooden pegs, open-work
copper rings, grains of maize, or little gourds, which served the
purpose of snuff-boxes; their necks, arms, wrists, legs, and ankles
were a perfect mass of brass and copper rings, or sometimes were
covered with a lot of bright buttons. Rows of red beads, called
_sames-sames_, or _talakas_, seemed also very popular. As they had no
pockets, they attached their knives, pipes and other articles to
various parts of their body; so that altogether, in their holiday
attire, the rich men of the district might not inappropriately be
compared to walking shrines.

With their teeth they had all played the strangest of vagaries; the
upper and lower incisors had generally been extracted, and the others
had been filed to points or carved into hooks, like the fangs of a
rattle-snake. Their fingernails were allowed to grow to such an
immoderate length as to render the hands well-nigh useless, and their
swarthy skins were tattooed with figures of trees, birds, crescents and
discs, or, not unfrequently, with those zigzag lines which Livingstone
thinks he recognizes as resembling those observed in ancient Egyptian
drawings. The tattooing is effected by means of a blue substance
inserted into incisions previously made in the skin. Every child is
tattooed in precisely the same pattern as his father before him, and
thus it may always be ascertained to what family he belongs. Instead of
carrying his armorial bearings upon his plate or upon the panels of his
carriage, the African magnate wears them emblazoned on his own bosom!

The garments that were usually worn were simply aprons of
antelope-skins descending to the knees, but occasionally a short
petticoat might be seen made of woven grass and dyed with bright
colours. The ladies not unfrequently wore girdles of beads attached to
green skirts embroidered with silk and ornamented with bits of glass or
cowries, or sometimes the skirts were made of the grass cloth called
_lambda_, which, in blue, yellow, or black, is so much valued by the
people of Zanzibar.

Garments of these pretensions, however, always indicated that the
wearers belonged to the upper classes; the lower orders, such as the
smaller dealers, as well as the slaves, had hardly any clothes at all.

The women commonly acted as porters, and arrived at the market with
huge baskets on their backs, which they secured by means of straps
passed across the forehead. Having deposited their loads upon the
chitoka, they turned out their goods, and then seated themselves inside
the empty baskets.

As the result of the extreme fertility of the country all the articles
offered for sale were of a first-rate quality. There were large stores
of rice, which had been grown at a profit a hundred times as great as
the cost, and maize which, producing three crops in eight months,
yielded a profit as large again as the rice. There were also sesame,
Urua pepper stronger than Cayenne, manioc, nutmegs, salt, and palm-oil.
In the market, too, were hundreds of goats, pigs and sheep, evidently
of a Tartar breed, with hair instead of wool; and there was a good
supply of fish and poultry. Besides all these there was an attractive
display of bright-coloured pottery, the designs of which were very
symmetrical.

In shrill, squeaky voices, children were crying several varieties of
native drinks; banana-wine, _pombé_, which, whatever it was, seemed to
be in great demand; _malofoo_, a kind of beer compounded of bananas,
and mead, a mixture of honey and water, fermented with malt.

But the most prominent feature in the whole market was the traffic in
stuffs and ivory. The pieces could be counted by thousands of the
unbleached _mcrikani_ from Salem in Massachusetts, of the blue cotton,
_kaniki_, thirty-four inches wide, and of the checked _sohari_, blue
and black with its scarlet border. More expensive than these were lots
of silk _diulis_, with red, green, or yellow grounds, which are sold in
lengths of three yards, at prices varying from seven dollars to eighty,
when they are interwoven with gold.

The ivory had come from well-nigh every part of Central Africa, and was
destined for Khartoom, Zanzibar, and Natal, many of the merchants
dealing in this commodity exclusively.

How vast a number of elephants must be slaughtered to supply this ivory
may be imagined when it is remembered that over 200 tons, that is,
1,125,000 lbs., are exported annually to Europe. Of this, much the
larger share goes to England, where the Sheffield cutlery consumes
about 382,500 lbs. From the West Coast of Africa alone the produce is
nearly 140 tons.

The average weight of a pair of tusks is 28 lbs., and the ordinary
value of these in 1874 would be about 60_l_.; but here in Kazonndé were
some weighing no less than 165 lbs., of that soft, translucent quality
which retains its whiteness far better than the ivory from other
sources.

As already mentioned, slaves are not unfrequently used as current money
amongst the African traders, but the natives themselves usually pay for
their goods with Venetian glass beads, of which the chalk-white are
called _catchokolos_, the black _bubulus_, and the red
_sikunderetches_. Strung in ten rows, or _khetés_, these beads are
twisted twice round the neck, forming what is called a _foondo_, which
is always reckoned of considerable value.

The usual measure by which they are sold is the _frasilah_, containing
a weight of about 70 lbs. Livingstone, Cameron and Stanley always took
care to be well provided with this kind of currency. In default of
beads, the picé, a Zanzibar coin worth something more than a farthing,
and _vioon-gooas,_ shells peculiar to the East Coast, are recognized as
a medium of exchange in the market. Amongst the cannibal tribes a
certain value is attached to human teeth, and at the lakoni some
natives might be seen wearing strings of teeth, the owners of which
they had probably, at some previous time, devoured. This species of
currency, however, was falling rapidly into disuse.

Towards the middle of the day the excitement of the market reached its
highest pitch, and the uproar became perfectly deafening. The voices of
the eager sellers mingled with those of indignant and overcharged
customers; fights were numerous, and as there was an utter absence of
any kind of police, no effort was made to restore peace or order
amongst the unruly crowd.

It was just noon when Alvez gave orders that the slaves he wished to
dispose of should be placed on view. Thereupon nearly two thousand
unfortunates were brought forward, many of whom had been confined in
the dealer's barracks for several months. Most of the stock, however,
had been so carefully attended to that they were in good condition, and
it was only the last batch that looked as if they would be improved by
another month's rest; but as the demand upon the East Coast was now
very large, Alvez hoped to get a good price for all, and determined to
part with even the last arrivals for whatever sum he could obtain.

Amongst these latter, whom the havildars drove like a herd of cattle
into the middle of the chitoka, were Tom and his three friends. They
were closely chained, and rage and shame were depicted in their
countenances.

Bat passed a quick and scrutinizing gaze around him, and said to the
others,--

"I do not see Mr. Dick."

Tom answered mournfully,--

"Mr. Dick will be killed, if he is not dead already. Our only hope is
that we may now all be bought in one lot; it will be a consolation to
us if we can be all together."

Tears rose to Bat's eyes as he thought of how his poor old father was
likely to be sold, and carried away to wear out his days as a common
slave.

The sale now commenced. The agents of Alvez proceeded to divide the
slaves, men, women and children, into lots, treating them in no respect
better than beasts in a cattle-market. Tom and the others were paraded
about from customer to customer, an agent accompanying them to proclaim
the price demanded. Strong, intelligent-looking Americans, quite
different to the miserable creatures brought from the banks of the
Zambesi and Lualaba, they at once attracted the observation of the Arab
and half-breed dealers. Just as though they were examining a horse, the
buyers felt their limbs, turned them round and round, looked at their
teeth, and finally tested their paces by throwing a stick to a distance
and making them run to fetch it.

All the slaves were subjected to similar humiliations; and ail alike,
except the very young children, seemed deeply sensible of their
degradation. The cruelty exhibited towards them was very vile. Coïmbra,
who was half drunk, treated them with the utmost brutality; not that
they had any reason to expect any gentler dealings at the hands of the
new masters who might purchase them for ivory or any other commodity.
Children were torn away from their parents, husbands from their wives,
brothers from sisters, and without even the indulgence of a parting
word, were separated never to meet again.

The scenes that occur at such markets as this at Kazonndé are too
heartrending to be described in detail.

It is one of the peculiar requirements of the slave-trade that the two
sexes should have an entirely different destination. In fact, the
dealers who purchase men never purchase women. The women, who are
required to supply the Mussulman harems, are sent principally to Arab
districts to be exchanged for ivory; whilst the men, who are to be put
to hard labour, are despatched to the coast, East and West, whence they
are exported to the Spanish colonies, or to the markets of Muscat or
Madagascar.

To Tom and his friends the prospect of being transported to a slave
colony was far better than that of being retained in some Central
African province, where they could have no chance of regaining their
liberty; and the moment, to them, was accordingly one of great suspense.

Altogether, things turned out for them better than they dared
anticipate. They had at least the satisfaction of finding that as yet
they were not to be separated. Alvez, of course, had taken good care to
conceal the origin of this exceptional lot, and their own ignorance of
the language thoroughly prevented them from communicating it; but the
anxiety to secure so valuable a property rendered the competition for
it very keen; the bidding rose higher and higher, until at length the
four men were knocked down to a rich Arab dealer, who purposed in the
course of a few days to take them to Lake Tanganyika, and thence to one
of the deptôs of Zanzibar.

This journey, it is true, would be for 1500 miles across the most
unhealthy parts of Central Africa, through districts harassed by
internal wars; and it seemed improbable that Tom could survive the
hardships he must meet; like poor old Nan, he would succumb to fatigue;
but the brave fellows did not suffer themselves to fear the future,
they were only too happy to be still together; and the chain that bound
them one to another was felt to be easier and lighter to bear.

Their new master knew that it was for his own interest that his
purchase should be well taken care of; he looked to make a substantial
profit at Zanzibar, and sent them off at once to his own private
barracks; consequently they saw no more of what transpired at Kazonndé.




CHAPTER XI.

A BOWL OF PUNCH.


The afternoon was passing away, and it was now past four o'clock, when
the sound of drums, cymbals, and a variety of native instruments was
heard at the end of the main thoroughfare. The market was still going
on with the same animation as before; half a day's screeching and
fighting seemed neither to have wearied the voices nor broken the limbs
of the demoniacal traffickers; there was a considerable number of
slaves still to be disposed of, and the dealers were haggling over the
remaining lots with an excitement of which a sudden panic on the London
Stock Exchange could give a very inadequate conception.

But the discordant concert which suddenly broke upon the ear was the
signal for business to be at once suspended. The crowd might cease its
uproar, and recover its breath. The King of Kazonndé, Moené Loonga, was
about to honour the _lakoni_ with a visit.

Attended by a large retinue of wives, officers, soldiers, and slaves,
the monarch was conveyed to the middle of the market-place in an old
palanquin, from which he was obliged to have five or six people to help
him to descend. Alvez and the other traders advanced to meet him with
the most exaggerated gestures of reverence, all of which he received as
his rightful homage.

He was a man of fifty years of age, but might easily have passed for
eighty. He looked like an old, decrepit monkey. On his head was a kind
of tiara, adorned with leopards' claws dyed red, and tufts of
greyish-white hair; this was the usual crown of the sovereigns of
Kazonndé. From his waist hung two skirts of coodoo-hide, stiff as
blacksmiths' aprons, and embroidered with pearls. The tattooings on his
breast were so numerous that his pedigree, which they declared, might
seem to reach back to time immemorial. His wrists and arms were encased
in copper bracelets, thickly encrusted with beads; he wore a pair of
top-boots, a present from Alvez some twenty years ago; in his left hand
he carried a great stick surmounted by a silver knob; in his right a
fly-flapper with a handle studded with pearls; over his head was
carried an old umbrella with as many patches as a Harlequin's coat,
whilst from his neck hung Cousin Benedict's magnifying-glass, and on
his nose were the spectacles which had been stolen from Bat's pocket.

[Illustration: The potentate beneath whose sway the country trembled
for a hundred miles round]

Such was the appearance of the potentate beneath whose sway the country
trembled for a hundred miles round.

By virtue of his sovereignty Moené Loonga claimed to be of celestial
origin; and any subject who should have the audacity to raise a
question on this point would have been despatched forthwith to another
world. All his actions, his eating and drinking, were supposed to be
performed by divine impulse. He certainly drank like no other mortal;
his officers and ministers, confirmed tipplers as they were, appeared
sober men in comparison with himself, and he seemed never to be doing
anything but imbibing strong pombé, and over-proof spirit with which
Alvez kept him liberally supplied.

In his harem Moené Loonga had wives of all ages from forty to fourteen,
most of whom accompanied him on his visit to the _lakoni_. Moena, the
chief wife, who was called the queen, was the eldest of them all, and,
like the rest, was of royal blood. She was a vixenish-looking woman,
very gaily attired; she wore a kind of bright tartan over a skirt of
woven grass, embroidered with pearls; round her throat was a profusion
of necklaces, and her hair was mounted up in tiers that toppled high
above her head, making her resemble some hideous monster. The younger
wives, all of them sisters or cousins of the king, were less
elaborately dressed. They walked behind her, ready at the slightest
sign to perform the most menial services. Did his Majesty wish to sit
down, two of them would immediately stoop to the ground and form a seat
with their bodies, whilst others would have to lie down and support his
feet upon their backs: a throne and footstool of living ebony.

Amidst the staggering, half-tipsy crowd of ministers, officers, and
magicians that composed Moené Loonga's suite, there was hardly a man to
be seen who had not lost either an eye, an ear, or hand, or nose. Death
and mutilation were the only two punishments practised in Kazonndé, and
the slightest offence involved the instant amputation of some member of
the body. The loss of the ear was considered the severest penalty, as
it prevented the possibility of wearing earrings!

The governors of districts, or _kilolos_, whether hereditary or
appointed for four years, were distinguished by red waistcoats and
zebra-skin caps; in their hands they brandished long rattans, coated at
one extremity with a varnish of magic drugs.

The weapons carried by the soldiers consisted of wooden bows adorned
with fringes and provided with a spare bowstring, knives filed into the
shape of serpents' tongues, long, broad lances, and shields of palm
wood, ornamented with arabesques. In the matter of uniform, the royal
army had no demands to make upon the royal treasury.

Amongst the attendants of the king there was a considerable number of
sorcerers and musicians. The sorcerers, or _mganga_, were practically
the physicians of the court, the savages having the most implicit faith
in divinations and incantations of every kind, and employing fetishes,
clay or wooden figures, representing sometimes ordinary human beings
and sometimes fantastic animals. Like the rest of the retinue, these
magicians were, for the most part, more or less mutilated, an
indication that some of their prescriptions on behalf of the king had
failed of success.

The musicians were of both sexes, some performing on shrill rattles,
some on huge drums, whilst others played on instruments called
_marimbas_, a kind of dulcimer made of two rows of different-sized
gourds fastened in a frame, and struck by sticks with india-rubber
balls at the end. To any but native ears the music was perfectly
deafening.

[Illustration: Alvez advanced and presented the king with some fresh
tobacco.]

Several flags and banners were carried in the procession, and amongst
these was mixed up a number of long pikes, upon which were stuck the
skulls of the various chiefs that Moené Loonga had conquered in battle.

As the king as helped out of his palanquin, the acclamations rose
higher and higher from every quarter of the market place The soldiers
attached to the caravans fired off their old guns, though the reports
were almost too feeble to be heard above the noisy vociferations of the
crowd; and the havildars rubbed their black noses with cinnabar powder,
which they carried in bags, and prostrated themselves. Alvez advanced
and presented the king with some fresh tobacco, "the appeasing herb,"
as it is called in the native dialect; and certainly Moené Loonga
seemed to require some appeasing, as, for some unknown reason, he was
in a thoroughly bad temper.

Coïmbra, Ibn Hamish and the dealers all came forward to pay their court
to the monarch, the Arabs greeting him with the cry of _marhaba_, or
welcome; others clapped their hands and bowed to the very ground; while
some even smeared themselves with mud, in token of their most servile
subjection.

But Moené Loonga scarcely took notice of any of them; he went
staggering along, rolling like a ship upon a stormy sea, and made his
way past the crowds of slaves, each of whom, no less than their
masters, trembled lest he should think fit to claim them for his own.

Negoro, who kept close at Alvez' side, did not fail to render his
homage along with the rest. Alvez and the king were carrying on a
conversation in the native language, if that could be called a
conversation in which Moené Loonga merely jerked out a few
monosyllables from his inflamed and swollen lips. He was asking Alvez
to replenish his stock of brandy.

"We are proud to welcome your majesty at the market of Kazonndé," Alvez
was saying.

"Get me brandy," was all the drunken king's reply.

"Will it please your majesty to take part in the business of the
_lakoni_?" Alvez tried to ask.

"Drink!" blurted out the king impatiently.

Alvez continued,--

"My friend Negoro here is anxious to greet your majesty after his long
absence."

"Drink!" roared the monarch again.

"Will the king take pombé or mead?" asked Alvez, at last obliged to
take notice of the demand.

"Brandy! give me fire-water!" yelled the king, in a fury. "For every
drop you shall have ..."

"A drop of a white man's blood!" suggested Negoro, glancing at Alvez.

"Yes, yes; kill a white man," assented Moené Loonga, his ferocious
instincts all aroused by the proposition.

"There is a white man here," said Alvez, "who has killed my agent. He
must be punished for his act."

"Send him to King Masongo!" cried the king; "Masongo and the Assuas
will cut him up and eat him alive."

Only too true it is that cannibalism is still openly practised in
certain provinces of Central Africa. Livingstone records that the
Manyuemas not only eat men killed in war, but even buy slaves for that
purpose; it is said to be the avowal of these Manyuemas that "human
flesh is slightly salt, and requires no seasoning." Cameron relates how
in the dominions of Moené Booga dead bodies were soaked for a few days
in running water as a preparation for their being devoured; and Stanley
found traces of a widely-spread cannibalism amongst the inhabitants of
Ukusu.

But however horrible might be the manner of death proposed by Moené
Loonga, it did not at all suit Negoro's purpose to let Dick Sands out
of his clutches.

"The white man is here," he said to the king; "it is here he has
committed his offence, and here he should be punished."

"If you will," replied Moené Loonga; "only I must have fire-water; a
drop of fire-water for every drop of the white man's blood."

"Yes, you shall have the fire-water," assented Alvez, "and what is
more, you shall have it all alight. We will give your majesty a bowl of
blazing punch."

The thought had struck Alvez, and he was himself delighted with the
idea, that he would set the spirit in flames. Moené Loonga had
complained that the "fire-water" did not justify its name as it ought,
and Alvez hoped that perhaps, administered in this new form, it might
revivify the deadened membranes of the palate of the king.

Moené Loonga did not conceal his satisfaction. Wives and courtiers
alike were full of anticipation. They had all drunk brandy, but they
had not drunk brandy alight. And not only was their thirst for alcohol
to be satisfied; their thirst for blood was likewise to be indulged;
and when it is remembered how, even amongst the civilized, drunkenness
reduces a man below the level of a brute, it may be imagined to what
barbarous cruelties Dick Sands was likely to be exposed. The idea of
torturing a white man was not altogether repugnant to the coloured
blood of either Alvez or Coïmbra, while with Negoro the spirit of
vengeance had completely overpowered all feeling of compunction.

Night, without any intervening twilight, was soon drawing on, and the
contemplated display could hardly fail to be effective. The programme
for the evening consisted of two parts; first, the blazing punch-bowl;
then the torture, culminating in an execution.

The destined victim was still closely confined in his dark and dreary
dungeon; all the slaves, whether sold or not, had been driven back to
the barracks, and the chitoka was cleared of every one except the
slave-dealers, the havildars, and the soldiers, who hoped, by favour of
the king, to have a share of the flaming punch.

Alvez did not long delay the proceedings. He ordered a huge caldron,
capable of containing more than twenty gallons, to be placed in the
centre of the market-place. Into this were emptied several casks of
highly-rectified spirit, of a very inferior quality, to which was added
a supply of cinnamon and other spices, no ingredient being omitted
which was likely to give a pungency to suit the savage palate.

The whole royal retinue formed a circle round the king. Fascinated by
the sight of the spirit, Moené Loonga came reeling up to the edge of
the punch-bowl, and seemed ready to plunge himself head foremost into
it. Alvez held him back, at the same time placing a lucifer in his hand.

"Set it alight!" cried the slave-dealer, grinning slily as he spoke.

The king applied the match to the surface of the spirit. The effect was
instantaneous. High above the edge of the bowl the blue flame rose and
curled. To give intensity to the process Alvez had added a sprinkling
of salt to the mixture, and this caused the fire to cast upon the faces
of all around that lurid glare which is generally associated with
apparitions of ghosts and phantoms. Half intoxicated already, the
negroes yelled and gesticulated; and joining hands, they performed a
fiendish dance around their monarch. Alvez stood and stirred the spirit
with an enormous metal ladle, attached to a pole, and as the flames
rose yet higher and higher they seemed to throw a more and more
unearthly glamour over the ape-like forms that circled in their wild
career.

Moené Loonga, in his eagerness, soon seized the ladle from the
slave-dealer's hands, plunged it deep into the bowl, and bringing it up
again full of the blazing punch, raised it to his lips.

A horrible shriek brought the dancers to a sudden standstill. By a kind
of spontaneous combustion, the king had taken fire internally; though
it was a fire that emitted little heat, it was none the less intense
and consuming. In an instant one of the ministers in attendance ran to
the king's assistance, but he, almost as much alcoholized as his
master, caught fire as well, and soon both monarch and minister lay
writhing on the ground in unutterable agony. Not a soul was able to
lend a helping hand. Alvez and Negoro were at a loss what to do; the
courtiers dared not expose themselves to so terrible a fate; the women
had all fled in alarm, and Coïmbra, awakened to the conviction of the
inflammability of his own condition, had rapidly decamped.

[Illustration: The king had taken fire internally.]

To say the truth, it was impossible to do anything; water would have
proved unavailing to quench the pale blue flame that hovered over the
prostrate forms, every tissue of which was so thoroughly impregnated
with spirit, that combustion, though outwardly extinguished, would
continue its work internally.

In a few minutes life was extinct, but the bodies continued long
afterwards to burn; until, upon the spot where they had fallen, a few
light ashes, some fragments of the spinal column, some fingers and some
toes, covered with a thin layer of stinking soot, were all that
remained of the King of Kazonndé and his ill fated minister.




CHAPTER XII.

ROYAL OBSEQUIES.


On the following morning the town of Kazonndé presented an aspect of
unwonted desolation. Awe-struck at the event of the previous evening,
the natives had all shut themselves up in their huts. That a monarch
who was to be assumed as of divine origin should perish with one of his
ministers by so horrible a death was a thing wholly unparalleled in
their experience. Some of the elder part of the community remembered
having taken part in certain cannibal preparations, and were aware that
the cremation of a human body is no easy matter, yet here was a case in
which two men had been all but utterly consumed without any extraneous
application. Here was a mystery that baffled all their comprehension.

Old Alvez had also retired to the seclusion of his own residence;
having been warned by Negoro that he would probably be held responsible
for the occurrence, he deemed it prudent to keep in retirement.
Meanwhile Negoro industriously circulated the report that the king's
death had been brought about by supernatural means reserved by the
great Manitoo solely for his elect, and that it was sacred fire that
had proceeded from his body. The superstitious natives readily received
this version of the affair, and at once proceeded to honour Moené
Loonga with funeral rites worthy of one thus conspicuously elevated to
the rank of the gods. The ceremony (which entailed an expenditure of
human blood incredible except that it is authenticated by Cameron and
other African travellers) was just the opportunity that Negoro required
for carrying out his designs against Dick, whom he intended to take a
prominent part in it.

The natural successor to the king was the queen Moena. By inaugurating
the funeral without delay and thus assuming the semblance of authority,
she forestalled the king of Ukusu or any other rival who might venture
to dispute her sovereignty; and moreover, by taking the reins of
government into her hands she avoided the fate reserved for the other
wives who, had they been allowed to live, might prove somewhat
troublesome to the shrew. Accordingly, with the sound of coodoo horns
and marimbas, she caused a proclamation to be made in the various
quarters of the town, that the obsequies of the deceased monarch would
be celebrated on the next evening with all due solemnity.

The announcement met with no opposition either from the officials about
the court or from the public at large. Alvez and the traders generally
were quite satisfied with Moena's assumption of the supremacy, knowing
that by a few presents and a little flattery they could make her
sufficiently considerate for their own interests.

Preparations began at once. At the end of the chief thoroughfare flowed
a deep and rapid brook, an affluent of the Coango, in the dry bed of
which the royal grave was to be formed. Natives were immediately set to
work to construct a dam by means of which the water should be diverted,
until the burial was over, into a temporary channel across the plain;
the last act in the ceremonial being to undam the stream and allow it
to resume its proper course.

Negoro had formed the resolution that Dick Sands should be one of the
victims to be sacrificed upon the king's tomb. Thoroughly aware as he
was that the indignation which had caused the death of Harris extended
in at least an equal degree to himself, the cowardly rascal would not
have ventured to approach Dick under similar circumstances at the risk
of meeting a similar fate; but knowing him to be a prisoner bound hand
and foot, from whom there could be nothing to fear, he resolved to go
to him in his dungeon-*

Not only did he delight in torturing his victims, but he derived an
especial gratification from witnessing the torture.

About the middle of the day, accordingly, he made his way to the cell
where Dick was detained under the strict watch of a havildar. There,
bound with fetters that penetrated his very flesh, lay the poor boy;
for the last four and twenty hours he had not been allowed a morsel of
food, and would gladly have faced the most painful death as a welcome
relief to his miseries.

But at the sight of Negoro all his energy revived; instinctively he
made an effort to burst his bonds, and to get a hold upon his
persecutor; but the strength of a giant would have been utterly
unavailing for such a design. Dick felt that the struggle he had to
make was of another kind, and forcing himself to an apparent composure,
he determined to look Negoro straight in the face, but to vouchsafe no
reply to anything he might say.

"I felt bound," Negoro began, "to come and pay my respects to my young
captain, and to tell him how sorry I am that he has not the same
authority here that he had on board the 'Pilgrim.'"

Finding that Dick returned no answer, he continued,--

"You remember your old cook, captain: I have come to know what you
would like to order for your breakfast."

Here he paused to give a brutal kick at Dick's foot, and went on,--

"I have also another question to ask you, captain; can you tell me how
it was that you landed here in Angola instead of upon the coast of
America?"

The way in which the question was put more than ever confirmed Dick's
impression that the "Pilgrim's" course had been altered by Negoro, but
he persevered in maintaining a contemptuous silence.

"It was a lucky thing for you, captain," resumed the vindictive
Portuguese, "that you had a good seaman on board, otherwise the ship
would have run aground on some reef in the tempest, instead of coming
ashore here in a friendly port."

[Illustration: "Your life is in my hands!"]

Whilst he was speaking, Negoro had gradually drawn nearer to the
prisoner, until their faces were almost in contact. Exasperated by
Dick's calmness, his countenance assumed an expression of the utmost
ferocity, and at last he burst forth in a paroxysm of rage.

"It is my turn now! I am master now! I am captain here! You are in my
power now! Your life is in my hands!"

"Take it, then," said Dick quietly; "death has no terrors for me, and
your wickedness will soon be avenged."

"Avenged!" roared Negoro; "do you suppose there is a single soul to
care about you? Avenged! who will concern himself with what befalls
you? except Alvez and me, there is no one with a shadow of authority
here; if you think you are going to get any help from old Tom or any of
those niggers, let me tell you that they are every one of them sold and
have been sent off to Zanzibar."

"Hercules is free," said Dick.

"Hercules!" sneered Negoro; "he has been food for lions and panthers
long ago, I am only sorry that I did not get the chance of disposing of
him myself."

"And there is Dingo," calmly persisted Dick; "sure as fate, he will
find you out some day."

"Dingo is dead!" retorted Negoro with malicious glee: "I shot the brute
myself, and I should be glad if every survivor of the 'Pilgrim' had
shared his fate."

"But remember," said Dick, "you have to follow them all yourself;" and
he fixed a sharp gaze upon his persecutor's eye.

The Portuguese villain was stung to the quick; he made a dash towards
the youth, and would have strangled him upon the spot, but remembering
that any such sudden action would be to liberate him from the torture
he was determined he should undergo, he controlled his rage, and after
giving strict orders to the havildar, who had been a passive spectator
of the scene, to keep a careful watch upon his charge, he left the
dungeon.

So far from depressing Dick's spirits, the interview had altogether a
contrary effect; his feelings had undergone a reaction, so that all his
energies were restored. Possibly Negoro in his sudden assault had
unintentionally loosened his fetters, for he certainly seemed to have
greater play for his limbs, and fancied that by a slight effort he
might succeed in disengaging his arms. Even that amount of freedom,
however, he knew could be of no real avail to him; he was a
closely-guarded prisoner, without hope of succour from without; and now
he had no other wish than cheerfully to meet the death that should
unite him to the friends who had gone before.

The hours passed on. The gleams of daylight that penetrated the
thatched roof of the prison gradually faded into darkness; the few
sounds on the chitoka, a great contrast to the hubbub of the day,
became hushed into silence, and night fell upon the town of Kazonndé.

Dick Sands slept soundly for about a couple of hours, and woke up
considerably refreshed. One of his arms, which was somewhat less
swollen than the other, he was able to withdraw from its bonds; it was
at any rate a relief to stretch it at his pleasure.

The havildar, grasping the neck of a brandy-bottle which he had just
drained, had sunk into a heavy slumber, and Dick Sands was
contemplating the possibility of getting posssession of his gaoler's
weapons when his attention was arrested by a scratching at the bottom
of the door. By the help of his liberated arm he contrived to crawl
noiselessly to the threshold, where the scratching increased in
violence. For a moment he was in doubt whether the noise proceeded from
the movements of a man or an animal. He gave a glance at the havildar,
who was sound asleep, and placing his lips against the door murmured
"Hercules!"

A low whining was the sole reply.

"It must be Dingo," muttered Dick to himself; "Negoro may have told me
a lie; perhaps, after all, the dog is not dead."

As though in answer to his thoughts, a dog's paw was pushed below the
door. Dick seized it eagerly; he had no doubt it was Dingo's; but if
the dog brought a message, it was sure to be tied to his neck, and
there seemed to be no means of getting at it, except the hole
underneath could be made large enough to admit the animal's head. Dick
determined to try and scrape away the soil at the threshold, and
commenced digging with his nails. But he had scarcely set himself to
his task when loud barkings, other than Dingo's, were heard in the
distance. The faithful creature had been scented out by the native
dogs, and instinct dictated an immediate flight. Alarm had evidently
been taken, as several gun-shots were fired; the havildar half roused
himself from his slumber, and Dick was fain to roll himself once more
into his corner, there to await the dawn of the day which was intended
to be his last.

[Illustration: All his energies were restored.]

Throughout that day, the grave-digging was carried on with unremitted
activity. A large number of the natives, under the superintendence of
the queen's prime minister, were set to work, and according to the
decree of Moena, who seemed resolved to continue the rigorous sway of
her departed husband, were bound, under penalty of mutilation, to
accomplish their task within the proscribed time.

As soon as the stream had been diverted into its temporary channel,
there was hollowed out in the dry river bed a pit, fifty feet long, ten
feet wide, and ten feet deep. This, towards the close of the day, was
lined throughout with living women, selected from Moené Loonga's
slaves; in ordinary cases it would have been their fate to be buried
alive beside their master; but in recognition of his miraculous death
it was ordained that they should be drowned beside his remains.[1]


[Footnote 1: The horrible hecatombs that commemorate the death of any
powerful chief in Central Africa defy all description. Cameron relates
that more than a hundred victims were sacrificed at the obsequies of
the father of the King of Kassongo.]


Generally, the royal corpse is arrayed in its richest vestments before
being consigned to the tomb, but in this case, when the remains
consisted only of a few charred bones, another plan was adopted. An
image of the king, perhaps rather flattering to the original, was made
of wicker-work; inside this were placed the fragments of bones and
skin, and the effigy itself was then arrayed in the robes of state,
which, as already mentioned, were not of a very costly description.

Cousin Benedict's spectacles were not forgotten, but were firmly
affixed to the countenance of the image. The masquerade had its
ludicrous as well as its terrible side.

When the evening arrived, a long procession was seen wending its way to
the place of interment; the uproar was perfectly deafening; shouts,
yells, the boisterous incantations of the musicians, the clang of
musical instruments, and the reports of many old muskets, mingled in
wild confusion.

The ceremony was to take place by torch-light, and the whole population
of Kazonndé, native and otherwise, was bound to be present. Alvez,
Coïmbra, Negoro, the Arab dealers and their havildars all helped to
swell the numbers, the queen having given express orders that no one
who had been at the lakoni should leave the town, and it was not deemed
prudent to disobey her commands.

The remains of the king were carried in a palanquin in the rear of the
cortége, surrounded by the wives of the second class, some of whom were
doomed to follow their master beyond the tomb. Queen Moena, in state
array, marched behind the catafalque.

Night was well advanced when the entire procession reached the banks of
the brook, but the resin-torches, waved on high by their bearers, shed
a ruddy glare upon the teeming crowd. The grave, with its lining of
living women, bound to its side by chains, was plainly visible; fifty
slaves, some resigned and mute, others uttering loud and piteous cries,
were there awaiting the moment when the rushing torrent should be
opened upon them.

The wives who were destined to perish had been selected by the queen
herself and were all in holiday-attire. One of the victims, who bore
the title of second wife, was forced down upon her hands and knees in
the grave, in order to form a resting-place for the effigy, as she had
been accustomed to do for the living sovereign; the third wife had to
sustain the image in an upright position, and the fourth lay down at
its feet to make a footstool.

In front of the effigy, at the end of the grave, a huge stake, painted
red, was planted firmly in the earth. Bound to this stake, his body
half naked, exhibiting marks of the tortures which by Negoro's orders
he had already undergone, friendless and hopeless, was Dick Sands!

[Illustration: Friendless and hopeless.]

The time, however, for opening the flood-gate had not yet arrived.
First of all, at a sign from the queen, the fourth wife, forming the
royal footstool had her throat cut by an executioner, her blood
streaming into the grave. This barbarous deed was the commencement of a
most frightful butchery. One after another, fifty slaves fell beneath
the slaughterous knife, until the river-bed was a very cataract of
blood. For half an hour the shrieks of the victims mingled with the
imprecations of their murderers, without evoking one single expression
of horror or sympathy from the gazing crowd around.

At a second signal from the queen, the barrier, which retained the
water above, was opened. By a refinement of cruelty the torrent was not
admitted suddenly to the grave, but allowed to trickle gradually in.

The first to be drowned were the slaves that carpeted the bottom of the
trench, their frightful struggles bearing witness to the slow death
that was overpowering them. Dick was immersed to his knees, but he
could be seen making what might seem one last frantic effort to burst
his bonds.

Steadily rose the water; the stream resumed its proper course; the last
head disappeared beneath its surface, and soon there remained nothing
to indicate that in the depth below there was a tomb where a hundred
victims had been sacrificed to the memory of the King of Kazonndé.

Painful as they are to describe, it is impossible to ignore the reality
of such scenes.




CHAPTER XIII.

IN CAPTIVITY.


So far from Mrs. Weldon and Jack having succumbed to the hardships to
which they had been exposed, they were both alive, and together with
Cousin Benedict were now in Kazonndé. After the assault upon the
ant-hill they had all three been conveyed beyond the encampment to a
spot where a rude palanquin was in readiness for Mrs. Weldon and her
son. The journey hence to Kazonndé was consequently accomplished
without much difficulty; Cousin Benedict, who performed it on foot, was
allowed to entomologize as much as he pleased upon the road, so that to
him the distance was a matter of no concern. The party reached their
destination a week sooner than Ibn Hamish's caravan, and the prisoners
were lodged in Alvez' quarters.

Jack was much better. After leaving the marshy districts he had no
return of fever, and as a certain amount of indulgence had been allowed
them on their journey, both he and his mother, as far as their health
was concerned, might be said to be in a satisfactory condition.

Of the rest of her former companions Mrs. Weldon could hear nothing.
She had herself been a witness of the escape of Hercules, but of course
knew nothing further of his fate; as for Dick Sands, she entertained a
sanguine hope that his white skin would protect him from any severe
treatment; but for Nan and the other poor negroes, here upon African
soil, she feared the very worst.

Being entirely shut off from communication with the outer world, she
was quite unaware of the arrival of the caravan; even if she had heard
the noisy commotion of the market she would not have known what it
meant, and she was in ignorance alike of the death of Harris, of the
sale of Tom and his companions, of the dreadful end of the king, and of
the royal obsequies in which poor Dick had been assigned so melancholy
a share. During the journey from the Coanza to Kazonndé, Harris and
Negoro had held no conversation with her, and since her arrival she had
not been allowed to pass the inclosure of the establishment, so that,
as far as she knew, she was quite alone, and being in Negoro's power,
was in a position from which it seemed only too likely nothing but
death could release her.

From Cousin Benedict, it is needless to repeat, she could expect no
assistance; his own personal pursuits engrossed him, and he had no care
nor leisure to bestow upon external circumstances. His first feeling,
on being made to understand that he was not in America, was one of deep
disappointment that the wonderful things he had seen were no
discoveries at all; they were simply African insects common on African
soil. This vexation, however, soon passed away, and he began to believe
that "the land of the Pharaohs" might possess as much entomological
wealth as "the land of the Incas."

"Ah," he would exclaim to Mrs. Weldon, heedless that she gave him
little or no attention, "this is the country of the manticoræ, and
wonderful coleoptera they are, with their long hairy legs, their sharp
elytra and their big mandibles; the most remarkable of them all is the
tuberous manticora. And isn't this, too, the land of the golden-tipped
calosomi? and of the prickly-legged goliaths of Guinea and Gabon? Here,
too, we ought to find the spotted anthidia, which lay their eggs in
empty snail-shells; and the sacred atenchus, which the old Egyptians
used to venerate as divine."

"Yes, yes;" he would say at another time, "this is the proper habitat
of those death's-head sphinxes which are now so common everywhere; and
this is the place for those 'Idias Bigoti,' so formidable to the
natives of Senegal. There must be wonderful discoveries to be made here
if only those good people will let me."

The "good people" referred to were Negoro and Harris, who had restored
him much of the liberty of which Dick Sands had found it necessary to
deprive him. With freedom to roam and in possession of his tin box,
Benedict would have been amongst the most contented of men, had it not
been for the loss of his spectacles and magnifying-glass, now buried
with the King of Kazonndé. Reduced to the necessity of poking every
insect almost into his eyes before he could discover its
characteristics, he would have sacrificed much to recover or replace
his glasses, but as such articles were not to be procured at any price,
he contented himself with the permission to go where he pleased within
the limits of the palisade. His keepers knew him well enough to be
satisfied that he would make no attempt to escape, and as the enclosure
was nearly a mile in circumference, containing many shrubs and trees
and huts with thatched roofs, besides being intersected by a running
stream, it afforded him a very fair scope for his researches, and who
should say that he would not discover some novel specimen to which, in
the records of entomological science, his own name might be assigned?

If thus the domain of Antonio Alvez was sufficient to satisfy Benedict,
to little Jack it might well seem immense. But though allowed to ramble
over the whole place as he liked, the child rarely cared to leave his
mother; he would be continually inquiring about his father, whom he had
now so long been expecting to see: he would ask why Nan and Hercules
and Dingo had gone away and left him; and perpetually he would be
expressing his wonder where Dick could be, and wishing he would come
back again. Mrs. Weldon could only hide her tears and answer him by
caresses.

Nothing, however, transpired to give the least intimation that any of
the prisoners were to be treated otherwise than they had been upon the
journey from the Coanza. Excepting such as were retained for old Alvez'
personal service, all the slaves had been sold, and the storehouses
were now full of stuffs and ivory, the stuffs destined to be sent into
the central provinces and the ivory to be exported. The establishment
was thus no longer crowded as it had been, and Mrs. Weldon and Jack
were lodged in a different hut to Cousin Benedict. All three, however,
took their meals together and were allowed a sufficient diet of mutton
or goats'-flesh, vegetables, manioc, sorghum and native fruits. With
the traders' servants they held no communication, but Halima, a young
slave who had been told off to attend to Mrs. Weldon, evinced for her
new mistress an attachment which, though rough, was evidently sincere.

[Illustration: He contented himself with the permission to go where he
pleased within the limits of the palisade.]

Old Alvez, who occupied the principal house in thedépôt, was rarely
seen; whilst the non-appearance of either Harris or Negoro caused Mrs.
Weldon much surprise and perplexity. In the midst of all her troubles,
too, she was haunted by the thought of the anxiety her husband must be
suffering on her account. Unaware of her having embarked on board the
"Pilgrim," at first he would have wondered at steamer after steamer
arriving at San Francisco without her. After a while the "Pilgrim"
would have been registered amongst the number of missing ships; and it
was certain the intelligence would be forwarded to him by his
correspondents, that the vessel had sailed from Auckland with his wife
and child on board. What was he to imagine? he might refuse to believe
that they had perished at sea, but he would never dream of their having
been carried to Africa, and would certainly institute a search in no
other direction than on the coast of America, or amongst the isles of
the Pacific. She had not the faintest hope of her whereabouts being
discovered, and involuntarily her thoughts turned to the possibility of
making an escape. She might well feel her heart sink within her at the
bare idea; even if she should succeed in eluding the vigilance of the
watch, there were two hundred miles of dense forest to be traversed
before the coast could be reached; nevertheless, it revealed itself to
her as her last chance, and failing all else, she resolved to hazard it.

But, first of all, she determined, if it were possible, to discover the
ultimate design of Negoro. She was not kept long in suspense. On the
6th of June, just a week after the royal funeral, the Portuguese
entered the depót, in which he had not set foot since his return, and
made his way straight to the hut in which he knew he should find the
prisoner. Benedict was out insect-hunting; Jack, under Halima's charge,
was being taken for a walk. Mrs. Weldon was alone.

Negoro pushed open the door, and said abruptly,--

"Mrs. Weldon, I have come to tell you, that Tom and his lot have been
sold for the Ujiji market; Nan died on her way here; and Dick Sands is
dead too."

Mrs. Weldon uttered a cry of horror.

"Yes, Mrs. Weldon," he continued; "he has got what he deserved; he shot
Harris, and has been executed for the murder. And here you are alone!
mark this! alone and in my power!"

What Negoro said was true; Tom, Bat, Actæon, and Austin had all been
sent off that morning on their way to Ujiji.

Mrs. Weldon groaned bitterly.

Negoro went on.

"If I chose, I could still further avenge upon you the ill-treatment I
got on board that ship; but it does not suit my purpose to kill you.
You and that boy of yours, and that idiot of a fly-catcher, all have a
certain value in the market. I mean to sell you."

"You dare not!" said Mrs. Weldon firmly; "you know you are making an
idle threat; who do you suppose would purchase people of white blood?"

"I know a customer who will give me the price I mean to ask," replied
Negoro with a brutal grin.

She bent down her head; only too well she knew that such things were
possible in this horrid land.

"Tell me who he is!" she said; "tell the name of the man who ..."

"James Weldon," he answered slowly.

"My husband!" she cried; "what do you mean?"

"I mean what I say. I mean to make your husband buy you back at my
price; and if he likes to pay for them, he shall have his son and his
cousin too."

[Illustration: "I suppose Weldon will not mind coming to fetch you?"]

"And when, and how, may I ask, do you propose to manage this?" replied
Mrs. Weldon, forcing herself to be calm.

"Here, and soon too. I suppose Weldon will not mind coming to fetch
you."

"He would not hesitate to come; but how could he know we are here?"

"I will go to him. I have money that will take me to San Francisco."

"What you stole from the 'Pilgrim'?" said Mrs. Weldon.

"Just so," replied Negoro; "and I have plenty more I suppose when
Weldon hears that you are a prisoner in Central Africa, he will not
think much of a hundred thousand dollars."

"But how is he to know the truth of your statement?"

"I shall take him a letter from you. You shall represent me as your
faithful servant, just escaped from the hands of savages."

"A letter such as that I will never write; never," said Mrs. Weldon
decisively.

"What? what? you refuse?"

"I refuse."

She had all the natural cravings of a woman and a wife, but so
thoroughly was she aware of the treachery of the man she had to deal
with, that she dreaded lest, as soon as he had touched the ransom, he
would dispose of her husband altogether.

There was a short silence.

"You will write that letter," said Negoro.

"Never!" repeated Mrs. Weldon.

"Remember your child!"

Mrs. Weldon's heart beat violently, but she did not answer a word.

"I will give you a week to think over this," hissed out Negoro.

Mrs. Weldon was still silent.

"A week! I will come again in a week; you will do as I wish, or it will
be the worse for you."

He gnashed his teeth, turned on his heel, and left the hut.




CHAPTER XIV.

A RAY OF HOPE.


Mrs. Weldon's first feeling on being left alone was a sense of relief
at having a week's respite. She had no trust in Negoro's honesty, but
she knew well enough that their "marketable value" would secure them
from any personal danger, and she had time to consider whether some
compromise might be effected by which her husband might be spared the
necessity of coming to Kazonndé. Upon the receipt of a letter from
herself, he would not hesitate for a moment in undertaking the journey,
but she entertained no little fear that after all perhaps her own
departure might not be permitted; the slightest caprice on the part of
Queen Moena would detain her as a captive, whilst as to Negoro, if once
he should get the ransom he wanted, he would take no further pains in
the matter.

Accordingly, she resolved to make the proposition that she should be
conveyed to some point upon the coast, where the bargain could be
concluded without Mr. Weldon's coming up the country.

She had to weigh all the consequences that would follow any refusal on
her part to fall in with Negoro's demands. Of course, he would spend
the interval in preparing for his start to America, and when he should
come back and find her still hesitating, was it not likely that he
would find scope for his revenge in suggesting that she must be
separated from her child.

The very thought sent a pang through her heart, and she clasped her
little boy tenderly to her side.

"What makes you so sad, mamma?" asked Jack.

"I was thinking of your father, my child," she answered; "would you not
like to see him?"

"Yes, yes; is he coming here?"

"No, my boy, he must not come here."

"Then let us take Dick, and Tom, and Hercules, and go to him."

Mrs. Weldon tried to conceal her tears.

"Have you heard from papa?"

"No."

"Then why do you not write to him?"

"Write to him?" repeated his mother, "that is the very thing I was
thinking about."

The child little knew the agitation that was troubling her mind.

Meanwhile Mrs. Weldon had another inducement which she hardly ventured
to own to herself for postponing her final decision. Was it absolutely
impossible that her liberation should be effected by some different
means altogether?

A few days previously she had overheard a conversation outside her hut,
and over this she had found herself continually pondering.

Alvez and one of the Ujiji dealers, discussing the future prospects of
their business, mutually agreed in denouncing the efforts that were
being made for the suppression of the slave-traffic, not only by the
cruisers on the coast, but by the intrusion of travellers and
missionaries into the interior.

Alvez averred that all these troublesome visitors ought to be
exterminated forthwith.

"But kill one, and another crops up," replied the dealer.

"Yes, their exaggerated reports bring up a swarm of them," said Alvez.

It seemed a subject of bitter complaint that the markets of Nyangwé,
Zanzibar, and the lake-district had been invaded by Speke and Grant and
others, and although they congratulated each other that the western
provinces had not yet been much persecuted, they confessed that now
that the travelling epidemic had begun to rage, there was no telling
how soon a lot of European and American busy-bodies might be among
them. Thedépôts at Cassange and Bihe had both been visited, and
although Kazonndé had hitherto been left quiet, there were rumours
enough that the continent was to be tramped over from east to west.[1]


[Footnote: This extraordinary feat was, it is universally known,
subsequently accomplished by Cameron.]


"And it may be," continued Alvez, "that that missionary fellow,
Livingstone, is already on his way to us; if he comes there can be but
one result; there must be freedom for all the slaves in Kazonndé."

"Freedom for the slaves in Kazonndé!" These were the words which in
connexion with Dr. Livingstone's name had arrested Mrs. Weldon's
attention, and who can wonder that she pondered them over and over
again, and ventured to associate them with her own prospects?

Here was a ray of hope!

The mere mention of Livingstone's name in association with this story
seems to demand a brief survey of his career.

Born on the 19th of March, 1813, David Livingstone was the second of
six children of a tradesman in the village of Blantyre, in Lanarkshire.
After two years' training in medicine and theology, he was sent out by
the London Missionary Society, and landed at the Cape of Good Hope in
1840, with the intention of joining Moffat in South Africa. After
exploring the country of the Bechuanas, he returned to Kuruman, and,
having married Moffat's daughter, proceeded in 1843 to found a mission
in the Mabotsa valley.

After four years he removed to Kolobeng in the Bechuana district, 225
miles north of Kuruman, whence, in 1849, starting off with his wife,
three children, and two friends, Mr. Oswell and Mr. Murray, he
discovered Lake Ngami, and returned by descending the course of the
Zouga.

The opposition of the natives had prevented his proceeding beyond Lake
Ngami at his first visit, and he made a second with no better success.
In a third attempt, however, he wended his way northwards with his
family and Mr. Oswell along the Chobé, an affluent of the Zambesi, and
after a difficult journey at length reached the district of the
Makalolos, of whom the chief, named Sebituané, joined him at Linyanté.
The Zambesi itself was discovered at the end of June, 1851, and the
doctor returned to the Cape for the purpose of sending his family to
England.

[Illustration: Dr. Livingstone. _Page_ 408.]

His next project was to cross the continent obliquely from south to
west, but in this expedition he had resolved that he would risk no life
but his own. Accompanied, therefore, by only a few natives, he started
in the following June, and skirting the Kalahari desert entered
Litoubarouba on the last day of the year; here he found the Bechuana
district much ravaged by the Boers, the original Dutch colonists, who
had formed the population of the Cape before it came into the
possession of the English. After a fortnight's stay, he proceeded into
the heart of the district of the Bamangonatos, and travelled
continuously until the 23rd of May, when he arrived at Linyanté, and
was received with much honour by Sekeletoo, who had recently become
sovereign of the Makalolos. A severe attack of fever detained the
traveller here for a period, but he made good use of the enforced rest
by studying the manners of the country, and became for the first time
sensible of its terrible sufferings in consequence of the slave-trade.

Descending the course of the Chobé to the Zambesi, he next entered
Naniele, and after visiting Katonga and Libonta, advanced to the point
of confluence of the Leeba with the Zambesi, where he determined upon
ascending the former as far as the Portuguese possessions in the west;
it was an undertaking, however, that required considerable preparation,
so that it was necessary for him to return to Linyanté.

On the 11th of November he again started. He was accompanied by
twenty-seven Makalolos, and ascended the Leeba till, in the territory
of the Balonda, he reached a spot where it received the waters of its
tributary the Makondo.

It was the first time a white man had ever penetrated so far.

Proceeding on their way, they arrived at the residence of Shinté, the
most powerful of the chieftains of the Balonda, by whom they were well
received, and having met with equal kindness from Kateema, a ruler on
the other side of the Leeba, they encamped, on the 20th of February,
1853, on the banks of Lake Dilolo.

Here it was that the real difficulty commenced; the arduous travelling,
the attacks of the natives, and their exorbitant demands, the
conspiracies of his own attendants and their desertions, would soon
have caused any one of less energy to abandon his enterprise; but David
Livingstone was not a man to be daunted; resolutely he persevered, and
on the 4th of April reached the banks of the Coango, the stream that
forms the frontier of the Portuguese possessions, and joins the Zaire
on the north.

Six days later he passed through Cassangé. Here it was that Alvez had
seen him. On the 31st of May he arrived at St. Paul de Loanda, having
traversed the continent in about two years.

It was not long, however, before he was off again. Following the banks
of the Coanza, the river which was to bring such trying experiences to
Dick Sands and his party, he reached the Lombé, and having met numbers
of slave-caravans on his way, again passed through Cassange, crossed
the Coango, and reached the Zambesi at Kewawa. By the 8th of the
following June he was again at Lake Dilolo, and descending the river,
he re-entered Linyanté. Here he stayed till the 3rd of November, when
he commenced his second great journey, which was to carry him
completely across Africa from west to east.

After visiting the famed Victoria Falls, the intrepid explorer quitted
the Zambesi, and took a north-easterly route. The transit of the
territory of the Batokas, a people brutalized by the inhalation of
hemp; a visit to Semalemboni the powerful chief of the district; the
passage of the Kafoni; a visit to king Mbourouma; an inspection of the
ruins of Zumbo, an old Portuguese town; a meeting with the chief
Mpendé, at that time at war with the Portuguese, these were the
principal events of this journey, and on the 22nd of April, Livingstone
left Teté, and having descended the river as far as its delta, reached
Quilimané, just four years after his last departure from the Cape. On
the 12th of July he embarked for the Mauritius, and on the 22nd of
December, 1856, he landed in England after an absence of sixteen years.

[Illustration: With none to guide him except a few natives.]

Loaded with honours by the Geographical Societies of London and Paris,
brilliantly entertained by all ranks, it would have been no matter of
surprise if he had surrendered himself to a well-earned repose; but no
thought of permanent rest occurred to him, and on the 1st of March,
1858, accompanied by his brother Charles, Captain Bedingfield, Dr.
Kirk, Dr. Miller, Mr. Thornton, and Mr. Baines, he started again, with
the intention of exploring the basin of the Zambesi, and arrived in due
time at the coast of Mozambique.

The party ascended the great river by the Kongone mouth; they were on
board a small steamer named the "Ma-Robert," and reached Teté on the
8th of September.

During the following year they investigated the lower course of the
Zambesi, and its left affluent the Shiré, and having visited Lake
Shirwa, they explored the territory of the Manganjas, and discovered
Lake Nyassa. In August, 1860, they returned to the Victoria Falls.

Early in the following year, Bishop Mackenzie and his missionary staff
arrived at the mouth of the Zambesi.

In March an exploration of the Rovouma was made on board the "Pioneer,"
the exploring party returning afterwards to Lake Nyassa, where they
remained a considerable time. The 30th of January, 1862, was signalized
by the arrival of Mrs. Livingstone, and by the addition of another
steamer, the "Lady Nyassa;" but the happiness of reunion was very
transient; it was but a short time before the enthusiastic Bishop
Mackenzie succumbed to the unhealthiness of the climate, and on the
27th of April Mrs. Livingstone expired in her husband's arms.

A second investigation of the Rovouma soon followed and at the end of
November the doctor returned to the Zambesi, and reascended the Shire.
In the spring of 1803 he lost his companion Mr. Thornton, and as his
brother and Dr. Kirk were both much debilitated, he insisted upon their
return to Europe, while he himself returned for the third time to Lake
Nyassa, and completed the hydrographical survey which already he had
begun.

A few months later found him once more at the mouth of the Zambesi;
thence he crossed over to Zanzibar, and after five years' absence
arrived in London, where he published his work, "The exploration of the
Zambesi and its affluents."

Still unwearied and insatiable in his longings, he was back again in
Zanzibar at the commencement of 1866, ready to begin his fourth
journey, this time attended only by a few sepoys and negroes.
Witnessing on his way some horrible scenes which were perpetrated as
the result of the prosecution of the slave-trade, he proceeded to
Mokalaosé on the shores of Lake Nyassa, where nearly all his attendants
deserted him, and returned to Zanzibar with the report that he was dead.

Dr. Livingstone meanwhile was not only alive, but undaunted in his
determination to visit the country between the two lakes Nyassa and
Tanganyika. With none to guide him except a few natives, he crossed the
Loangona, and in the following April discovered Lake Liemmba. Here he
lay for a whole month hovering between life and death, but rallying a
little he pushed on to the north shore of Lake Moero. Taking up his
quarters at Cazembé for six weeks, he made two separate explorations of
the lake, and then started farther northwards, intending to reach
Ujiji, an important town upon Lake Tanganyika; overtaken, however, by
floods, and again abandoned by his servants, he was obliged to retrace
his steps. Six weeks afterwards he had made his way southwards to the
great lake Bangweolo, whence once more he started towards Tanganyika.

This last effort was most trying, and the doctor had grown so weak that
he was obliged to be carried, but he reached Ujiji, where he was
gratified by finding some supplies that had been thoughtfully forwarded
to him by the Oriental Society at Calcutta.

[Illustration: "You are Dr. Livingstone, I presume?"]

His great aim now was to ascend the lake, and reach the sources of the
Nile. On the 21st of September he was at Bambarré, in the country of
the cannibal Manyuema, upon the Lualaba, the river afterwards
ascertained by Stanley to be the Upper Zaire or Congo. At Mamobela the
doctor was ill for twenty-four days, tended only by three followers who
continued faithful; but in July he made a vigorous effort, and although
he was reduced to a skeleton, made his way back to Ujiji.

During this long time no tidings of Livingstone reached Europe, and
many were the misgivings lest the rumours of his death were only too
true. He was himself, too, almost despairing as to receiving any help.
But help was closer at hand than he thought. On the 3rd of November,
only eleven days after his return to Ujiji, some gun shots were heard
within half a mile of the lake. The doctor went out to ascertain whence
they proceeded, and had not gone far before a white man stood before
him.

"You are Dr. Livingstone, I presume," said the stranger, raising his
cap.

"Yes, sir, I am Dr. Livingstone, and am happy to see you," answered the
doctor, smiling kindly.

The two shook each other warmly by the hand.

The new arrival was Henry Stanley, the correspondent of the _New York
Herald_, who had been sent out by Mr. Bennett, the editor, in search of
the great African explorer. On receiving his orders in October, 1870,
without a day's unnecessary delay he had embarked at Bombay for
Zanzibar, and, after a journey involving considerable peril, had
arrived safely at Ujiji.

Very soon the two travellers found themselves on the best of terms, and
set out together on an excursion to the north of Tanganyika. They
proceeded as far as Cape Magala, and decided that the chief outlet of
the lake must be an affluent of the Lualaba, a conclusion that was
subsequently confirmed by Cameron.

Towards the end of the year Stanley began to prepare to return.
Livingstone accompanied him as far as Kwihara, and on the 3rd of the
following March they parted.

"You have done for me what few men would venture to do; I am truly
grateful," said Livingstone.

Stanley could scarcely repress his tears as he expressed his hope that
the doctor might be spared to return to his friends safe and well.

"Good-bye!" said Stanley, choked with emotion.

"Good-bye!" answered the veteran feebly.

Thus they parted, and in July, 1872, Stanley landed at Marseilles.

Again David Livingstone resumed his researches in the interior.

After remaining five months at Kwihara he gathered together a retinue
consisting of his faithful followers Suzi, Chumah, Amoda, and Jacob
Wainwright, and fifty-six men sent to him by Stanley, and lost no time
in proceeding towards the south of Tanganyika. In the course of the
ensuing month the caravan encountered some frightful storms, but
succeeded in reaching Moura. There had previously been an extreme
drought, which was now followed by the rainy season, which entailed the
loss of many of the beasts of burden, in consequence of the bites of
the tzetsy.

On the 24th of January they were at Chitounkwé, and in April, after
rounding the east of Lake Bangweolo, they made their way towards the
village of Chitambo. At this point it was that Livingstone had parted
company with certain slave-dealers, who had carried the information to
old Alvez that the missionary traveller would very likely proceed by
way of Loanda to Kazonndé.

But on the 13th of June, the very day before Negoro reckoned on
obtaining from Mrs. Weldon the letter which should be the means of
securing him a hundred thousand dollars, tidings were circulated in the
district that on the 1st of May Dr. Livingstone had breathed his last.

The report proved perfectly true. On the 29th of April the caravan had
reached the village of Chitambo, the doctor so unwell that he was
carried on a litter. The following night he was in great pain, and
after repeatedly murmuring in a low voice, "Oh dear, oh dear!" he fell
into a kind of stupor. A short time afterwards he called up Suzi, and
having asked for some medicine, told his attendant that he should not
require anything more.

"You can go now."

About four o'clock next morning, when an anxious visit was made to his
room, the doctor was found kneeling by the bed-side, his head in his
hands, in the attitude of prayer. Suzi touched him, but his forehead
was icy with the coldness of death. He had died in the night.

His body was carried by those who loved him, and in spite of many
obstacles was brought to Zanzibar, whence, nine months after his death,
it was conveyed to England. On the 12th of April, 1874, it was interred
in Westminster Abbey, counted worthy to be deposited amongst those whom
the country most delights to honour.




CHAPTER XV.

AN EXCITING CHASE.


To say the truth, it was the very vaguest of hopes to which Mrs. Weldon
had been clinging, yet it was not without some thrill of disappointment
that she heard from the lips of old Alvez himself that Dr. Livingstone
had died at a little village on Lake Bangweolo. There had appeared to
be a sort of a link binding her to the civilized world, but it was now
abruptly snapped, and nothing remained for her but to make what terms
she could with the base and heartless Negoro.

On the 14th, the day appointed for the interview, he made his
appearance at the hut, firmly resolved to make no abatement in the
terms that he had proposed, Mrs. Weldon, on her part, being equally
determined not to yield to the demand.

"There is only one condition," she avowed, "upon which I will
acquiesce. My husband shall not be required to come up the country
here."

Negoro hesitated; at length he said that he would agree to her husband
being taken by ship to Mossamedes, a small port in the south of Angola,
much frequented by slavers, whither also, at a date hereafter to be
fixed, Alvez should send herself with Jack and Benedict; the
stipulation was confirmed that the ransom should be 100,000 dollars,
and it was further made part of the contract that Negoro should be
allowed to depart as an honest man.

Mrs. Weldon felt she had gained an important point in thus sparing her
husband the necessity of a journey to Kazonndé, and had no
apprehensions about herself on her way to Mossamedes, knowing that it
was to the interest of Alvez and Negoro alike to attend carefully to
her wants.

Upon the terms of the covenant being thus arranged, Mrs. Weldon wrote
such a letter to her husband as she knew would bring him with all speed
to Mossamedes, but she left it entirely to Negoro to represent himself
in whatever light he chose. Once in possession of the document, Negoro
lost no time in starting on his errand. The very next morning, taking
with him about twenty negroes, he set off towards the north, alleging
to Alvez as his motive for taking that direction, that he was not only
going to embark somewhere at the mouth of the Congo, but that he was
anxious to keep as far as possible from the prison-houses of the
Portuguese, with which already he had been involuntarily only too
familiar.

After his departure, Mrs. Weldon resolved to make the best of her
period of imprisonment, aware that it could hardly be less than four
months before he would return. She had no desire to go beyond the
precincts assigned her, even had the privilege been allowed her; but
warned by Negoro that Hercules was still free, and might at any time
attempt a rescue, Alvez had no thought of permitting her any
unnecessary liberty. Her life therefore soon resumed its previous
monotony.

The daily routine went on within the enclosure pretty much as in other
parts of the town, the women all being employed in various labours for
the benefit of their husbands and masters. The rice was pounded with
wooden pestles; the maize was peeled and winnowed, previously to
extracting the granulous substance for the drink which they call
_mtyellé_; the sorghum had to be gathered in, the season of its
ripening being marked by festive observances; there was a fragrant oil
to be expressed from a kind of olive named the _mpafoo_; the cotton had
to be spun on spindles, which were hardly less than a foot and a half
in length; there was the bark of trees to be woven into textures for
wearing; the manioc had to be dug up, and the cassava procured from its
roots; and besides all this, there was the preparation of the soil for
its future plantings, the usual productions of the country being the
_moritsané_ beans, growing in pods fifteen inches long upon stems
twenty feet high, the _arachides_, from which they procure a
serviceable oil, the _chilobé_ pea, the blossoms of which are used to
give a flavour to the insipid sorghum, cucumbers, of which the seeds
are roasted as chestnuts, as well as the common crops of coffee, sugar,
onions, guavas, and sesame.

To the women's lot, too, falls the manipulation of all the fermented
drinks, the _malafoo_, made from bananas, the _pombé_, and various
other liquors. Nor should the care of all the domestic animals be
forgotten; the cows that will not allow themselves to be milked unless
they can see their calf, or a stuffed representative of it; the
short-horned heifers that not unfrequently have a hump; the goats that,
like slaves, form part of the currency of the country; the pigs, the
sheep, and the poultry.

The men, meanwhile, smoke their hemp or tobacco, hunt buffaloes or
elephants, or are hired by the dealers to join in the slave-raids; the
harvest of slaves, in fact, being a thing of as regular and periodic
recurrence as the ingathering of the maize.

In her daily strolls, Mrs. Weldon would occasionally pause to watch the
women, but they only responded to her notice by a long stare or by a
hideous grimace; a kind of natural instinct made them hate a white
skin, and they had no spark of commiseration for the stranger who had
been brought among them; Halima, however, was a marked exception, she
grew more and more devoted to her mistress, and by degrees, the two
became able to exchange many sentences in the native dialect.

Jack generally accompanied his mother. Naturally enough he longed to
get outside the enclosure, but still he found considerable amusement in
watching the birds that built in a huge baobab that grew within; there
were maraboos making their nests with twigs; there were
scarlet-throated _souimangas_ with nests like weaver-birds; widow birds
that helped themselves liberally to the thatch of the huts; _calaos_
with their tuneful song; grey parrots, with bright red tails, called
_roufs_ by the Manyuema, who apply the same name to their reigning
chiefs; and insect-eating _drongos_, like grey linnets with large red
beaks. Hundreds of butterflies flitted about, especially in the
neighbourhood of the brooks; but these were more to the taste of Cousin
Benedict than of little Jack; over and over again the child expressed
his regret that he could not see over the walls, and more than ever he
seemed to miss his friend Dick, who had taught him to climb a mast, and
who he was sure would have fine fun with him in the branches of the
trees, which were growing sometimes to the height of a hundred feet.

[Illustration: The insufferable heat had driven all the residents
within the depót indoors.]

So long as the supply of insects did not fail, Benedict would have been
contented to stay on without a murmur in his present quarters. True,
without his glasses he worked at a disadvantage; but he had had the
good fortune to discover a minute bee that forms its cells in the holes
of worm-eaten wood, and a "sphex" that practises the craft of the
cuckoo, and deposits its eggs in an abode not prepared by itself.
Mosquitos abounded in swarms, and the worthy naturalist was so covered
by their stings as to be hardly recognizable; but when Mrs. Weldon
remonstrated with him for exposing himself so unnecessarily, he merely
scratched the irritated places on his skin, and said--

"It is their instinct, you know; it is their instinct."

On the 17th of June an adventure happened to him which was attended
with unexpected consequences. It was about eleven o'clock in the
morning. The insufferable heat had driven all the residents within the
dépôt indoors, and not a native was to be seen in the streets of
Kazonndé. Mrs. Weldon was dozing; Jack was fast asleep. Benedict
himself, sorely against his will, for he heard the hum of many an
insect in the sunshine, had been driven to the seclusion of his cabin,
and was falling into an involuntary siesta.

Suddenly a buzz was heard, an insect's wing vibrating some fifteen
thousand beats a second!

"A hexapod!" cried Benedict, sitting up.

Short-sighted though he was, his hearing was acute, and his perception
made him thoroughly convinced that he was in proximity to some giant
specimen of its kind. Without moving from his seat he did his utmost to
ascertain what it was; he was determined not to flinch from the
sharpest of stings if only he could get the chance of capturing it.
Presently he made out a large black speck flitting about in the few
rays of daylight that were allowed to penetrate the hut. With bated
breath he waited in eager expectation. The insect, after long hovering
above him, finally settled on his head. A smile of satisfaction played
about his lips as he felt it crawling lightly through his hair. Equally
fearful of missing or injuring it, he restrained his first impulse to
grasp it in his hand.

"I will wait a minute," he thought; "perhaps it may creep down my nose;
by squinting a little perhaps I shall be able to see it."

For some moments hope alternated with fear. There sat Benedict with
what he persuaded himself was some new African hexapod perched upon his
head, and agitated by doubts as to the direction in which it would
move. Instead of travelling in the way he reckoned along his nose,
might it not crawl behind his ears or down his neck, or, worse than
all, resume its flight in the air?

Fortune seemed inclined to favour him. After threading the entanglement
of the naturalist's hair the insect was felt to be descending his
forehead. With a fortitude not unworthy of the Spartan who suffered his
breast to be gnawed by a fox, nor of the Roman hero who plunged his
hand into the red-hot coals, Benedict endured the tickling of the six
small feet, and made not a motion that might frighten the creature into
taking wing. After making repeated circuits of his forehead, it passed
just between his eyebrows; there was a moment of deep suspense lest it
should once more go upwards; but it soon began to move again; neither
to the right nor to the left did it turn, but kept straight on over the
furrows made by the constant rubbing of the spectacles, right along the
arch of the cartilage till it reached the extreme tip of the nose. Like
a couple of movable lenses, Benedict's two eyes steadily turned
themselves inwards till they were directed to the proper point.

[Illustration: Before long the old black speck was again flitting just
above his head. _Page_ 432.]

"Good!" he whispered to himself.

He was exulting at the discovery that what he had been waiting for so
patiently was a rare specimen of the tribe of the Cicindelidæ, peculiar
to the districts of Southern Africa.

"A tuberous manticora!" he exclaimed.

The insect began to move again, and as it crawled down to the entrance
of the nostrils the tickling sensation became too much for endurance,
and Benedict sneezed. He made a sudden clutch, but of course he only
caught his own nose. His vexation was very great, but he did not lose
his composure; he knew that the manticora rarely flies very high, and
that more frequently than not it simply crawls. Accordingly he groped
about a long time on his hands and knees, and at last he found it
basking in a ray of sunshine within a foot of him. His resolution was
soon taken. He would not run the risk of crushing it by trying to catch
it, but would make his observations on it as it crawled; and so with
his nose close to the ground, like a dog upon the scent, he followed it
on all fours, admiring it and examining it as it moved. Regardless of
the heat he not only left the doorway of his hut, but continued
creeping along till he reached the enclosing palisade.

At the foot of the fence the manticora, according to the habits of its
kind, began to seek a subterranean retreat, and coming to the opening
of a mole-track entered it at once. Benedict quite thought he had now
lost sight of his prize altogether, but his surprise was very great
when he found that the aperture was at least two feet wide, and that it
led into a gallery which would admit his whole body. His momentary
feeling of astonishment, however, gave way to his eagerness to follow
up the hexapod, and he continued burrowing like a ferret.

Without knowing it, he actually passed under the palisading, and was
now beyond it;--the mole-track, in fact, was a communication that had
been made between the interior and exterior of the enclosure. Benedict
had obtained his freedom, but so far from caring in the least for his
liberty he continued totally absorbed in the pursuit upon which he had
started. He watched with unflagging vigilance, and it was only when the
hexapod expanded its wings as if for flight that he prepared to
imprison it in the hollow of his hand.

All at once, however, he was taken by surprise; a whizz and a whirr and
the prize was gone!

Disappointed rather than despairing, Benedict raised himself up, and
looked about him. Before long the old black speck was again flitting
just above his head. There was every reason to hope that it would
ultimately settle once more upon the ground, but on this side of the
palisade there was a large forest a little way to the north, and if the
manticora were to get into its mass of foliage all hope of keeping it
in view would be lost, and there would be an end of the proud
expectation of storing it in the tin box, to be preserved among the
rest of the entomological wonders.

After a while the insect descended to the earth; it did not rest at
all, nor crawl as it had done previously, but made its advance by a
series of rapid hops. This made the chase for the near-sighted
naturalist a matter of great difficulty; he put his face as close to
the ground as possible, and kept starting off and stopping and starting
off again with his arms extended like a swimming frog, continually
making frantic clutches to find as continually that his grasp had been
eluded.

After running till he was out of breath, and scratching his hands
against the brushwood and the foliage till they bled, he had the
mortification of feeling the insect dash past his ear with what might
be a defiant buzz, and finding that it was out of sight for ever.

"Ungrateful hexapod!" he cried in dismay, "I intended to honour you
with the best place in my collection."

[Illustration: For that day at least Cousin Benedict had lost his
chance of being the happiest of entomologists. _Page 435._]

He knew not what to do, and could not reconcile himself to the loss; he
reproached himself for not having secured the manticora at the first;
he gazed at the forest till he persuaded himself he could see the
coveted insect in the distance, and, seized with a frantic impulse,
exclaimed,--

"I will have you yet!"

He did not even yet realize the fact that he had gained his liberty,
but heedless of everything except his own burning disappointment, and
at the risk of being attacked by natives or beset by wild beasts, he
was just on the very point of dashing into the heart of the wood when
suddenly a giant form confronted him, as suddenly a giant hand seized
him by the nape of his neck, and, lifting him up, carried him off with
apparently as little exertion as he could himself have carried off his
hexapod!

For that day at least Cousin Benedict had lost his chance of being the
happiest of entomologists.




CHAPTER XVI.

A MAGICIAN.


On finding that Cousin Benedict did not return to his quarters at the
proper hour, Mrs. Weldon began to feel uneasy. She could not imagine
what had become of him; his tin box with its contents were safe in his
hut, and even if a chance of escape had been offered him, she knew that
nothing would have induced him voluntarily to abandon his treasures.
She enlisted the services of Halima, and spent the remainder of the day
in searching for him, until at last she felt herself driven to the
conviction that he must have been confined by the orders of Alvez
himself; for what reason she could not divine, as Benedict had
undoubtedly been included in the number of prisoners to be delivered to
Mr. Weldon for the stipulated ransom.

But the rage of the trader when he heard of the escape of the captive
was an ample proof that he had had no hand in his disappearance. A
rigorous search was instituted in every direction, which resulted in
the discovery of the mole-track. Here beyond a question was the passage
through which the fly-catcher had found his way.

"Idiot! fool! rascal!" muttered Alvez, full of rage at the prospect of
losing a portion of the redemption-money; "if ever I get hold of him,
he shall pay dearly for this freak."

The opening was at once blocked up, the woods were scoured all round
for a considerable distance, but no trace of Benedict was to be found.
Mrs. Weldon was bitterly grieved and much overcome, but she had no
alternative except to resign herself as best she could to the loss of
her unfortunate relation; there was a tinge of bitterness in her
anxiety, for she could not help being irritated at the recklessness
with which he had withdrawn himself from the reach of her protection.

Meanwhile the weather for the time of year underwent a very unusual
change. Although the rainy season is ordinarily reckoned to terminate
about the end of April, the sky had suddenly become overcast in the
middle of June, rain had recommenced falling, and the downpour had been
so heavy and continuous that all the ground was thoroughly sodden. To
Mrs. Weldon personally this incessant rainfall brought no other
inconvenience beyond depriving her of her daily exercise, but to the
natives in general it was a very serious calamity.

The ripening crops in the low-lying districts were completely flooded,
and the inhabitants feared that they would be reduced to the greatest
extremities; all agricultural pursuits had come to a standstill, and
neither the queen nor her ministers could devise any expedient to avert
or mitigate the misfortune. They resolved at last to have recourse to
the magicians, not those who are called in request to heal diseases or
to procure good luck, but to the _mganga_, sorcerers of a superior
order, who are credited with the faculty of invoking or dispelling rain.

But it was all to no purpose. It was in vain that the _mganga_
monotoned their incantations, flourished their rattles, jingled their
bells, and exhibited their amulets; it was equally without avail that
they rolled up their balls of dirt and spat in the faces of all the
courtiers: the pitiless rain continued to descend, and the malign
influences that were ruling the clouds refused to be propitiated.

The prospect seemed to become more and more hopeless, when the report
was brought to Moena that there was a most wonderful _mganga_ resident
in the north of Angola. He had never been seen in this part of the
country, but fame declared him to be a magician of the very highest
order. Application, without delay, should be made to him; he surely
would be able to stay the rain.

Early in the morning of the 25th a great tinkling of bells announced
the magician's arrival at Kazonndé. The natives poured out to meet him
on his way to the _chitoka_, their minds being already predisposed in
his favour by a moderation of the downpour, and by sundry indications
of a coming change of wind.

The ordinary practice of the professors of the magical art is to
perambulate the villages in parties of three or four, accompanied by a
considerable number of acolytes and assistants. In this case the
_mganga_ came entirely alone. He was a pure negro of most imposing
stature, more than six feet high, and broad in proportion. All over his
chest was a fantastic pattern traced in pipe-clay, the lower portion of
his body being covered with a flowing skirt of woven grass, so long
that it made a train. Round his neck hung a string of birds' skulls,
upon his head he wore a leathern helmet ornamented with pearls and
plumes, and about his waist was a copper girdle, to which was attached
bells that tinkled like the harness of a Spanish mule. The only
instrument indicating his art was a basket he carried made of a
calabash containing shells, amulets, little wooden idols and other
fetishes, together with what was more important than all, a large
number of those balls of dung, without which no African ceremony of
divination could ever be complete.

One peculiarity was soon discovered by the crowd; the _mganga_ was
dumb, and could utter only one low, guttural sound, which was quite
unintelligible; this was a circumstance, however, that seemed only to
augment their faith in his powers.

With a stately strut that brought all his tinkling paraphernalia into
full play, the magician proceeded to make the circuit of the
market-place. The natives followed in a troop behind, endeavouring,
like monkeys, to imitate his every movement. He turned into the main
thoroughfare, and began to make his way direct to the royal residence,
whence, as soon as the queen heard of his approach, she advanced to
meet him. On seeing her, the _mganga_ bowed to the very dust; then,
rearing himself to his full height, he pointed aloft, and by the
significance of his animated gestures indicated that, although the
fleeting clouds were now going to the west, they would soon return
eastwards with a rotatory motion irresistibly strong.

[Illustration: The entire crowd joined in. _Page_ 441.]

All at once, to the surprise of the beholders, he stooped and took the
hand of the mighty sovereign of Kazonndé.

The courtiers hurried forward to check the unprecedented breach of
etiquette, but the foremost was driven back with so staggering a blow
that the others deemed it prudent to retire.

The queen herself appeared not to take the least offence at the
familiarity; she bestowed a hideous grimace, which was meant for a
smile, upon her illustrious visitor, who, still keeping his hold upon
her hand, started off walking at a rapid pace, the crowd following in
the rear. He directed his steps towards the residence of Alvez, and
finding the door closed, applied his strong shoulder to it with such
effect, that it fell bodily to the ground, and the passive sovereign
stood within the limits of the enclosure. The trader was about to
summon his slaves and soldiers to repel the unceremonious invasion of
his premises, but on beholding the queen all stepped back with
respectful reverence.

Before Alvez had time to ask the sovereign to what cause he was
indebted for the honour of her visit, the magician had cleared a wide
space around him, and had once again commenced his performances.
Brandishing his arms wildly he pointed to the clouds as though he were
arresting them in their course; he inflated his huge cheeks and blew
with all his strength, as if resolved to disperse the heavy masses, and
then stretching himself to his full height, he appeared to clutch them
in his giant grasp.

Deeply impressed, the superstitious Moena was half beside herself with
excitement; she uttered loud cries and involuntarily began herself to
imitate every one of the _mganga's_ gestures. The entire crowd joined
in, and very soon the low guttural note of the sorcerer was lost,
totally drowned in the turmoil of howls, shrieks, and discordant songs.

To the chagrin, however, both of the queen and her subjects, there was
not the slightest intimation that the clouds above were going to permit
a rift by which the rays of the tropical sun could find a passage. On
the contrary, the tokens of improvement in the weather, which had been
observed in the early morning, had all disappeared, the atmosphere was
darker than ever, and heavy storm-drops began to patter down.

A reaction was beginning to take place in the enthusiasm of the crowd.
After all, then, it would seem that this famous _mganga_ from whom so
much had been expected, had no power above the rest. Disappointment
every moment grew more keen, and soon there was a positive display of
irritation. The natives pressed around him with closed fists and
threatening gestures. A frown gathered on Moena's face, and her lips
opened with muttered words clear enough to make the magician understand
that his ears were in jeopardy. His position was evidently becoming
critical.

An unexpected incident suddenly altered the aspect of affairs.

The _mganga_ was quite tall enough to see over the heads of the crowd,
and all at once pausing in the midst of his incantations, he pointed to
a distant corner of the enclosure. All eyes were instantly turned in
that direction. Mrs. Weldon and Jack had just come out of their hut,
and catching sight of them, the _mganga_ stood with his left hand
pointing towards them and his right upstretched towards the heavens.

Intuitively the multitude comprehended his meaning. Here was the
explanation of the mystery. It was this white woman with her child that
had been the cause of all their misery, it was owing to them that the
clouds had poured down this desolating rain. With yells of execration
the whole mob made a dash towards the unfortunate lady who, pale with
fright and rigid as a statue, stood clasping her boy to her side. The
_mganga_, however, anticipated them. Having pushed his way through the
infuriated throng, he seized the child and held him high in the air, as
though about to hurl him to the ground, a peace-offering to the
offended gods.

[Illustration: "Here they are, captain! both of them!!"]

Mrs. Weldon gave a piercing shriek, and fell senseless to the earth.

Lifting her up, and making a sign to the queen that all would now be
right, the _mganga_ retreated carrying both mother and child through
the crowd, who retreated before him and made an open passage.

Alvez now felt that it was time to interfere. Already one of his
prisoners had eluded his vigilance, and was he now to see two more
carried off before his eyes? was he to lose the whole of the expected
ransom? no, rather would he see Kazonndé destroyed by a deluge, than
resign his chance of securing so good a prize. Darting forwards he
attempted to obstruct the magician's progress; but public opinion was
against him; at a sign from the queen, he was seized by the guards, and
he was aware well enough of what would be the immediate consequence of
resistance. He deemed it prudent to desist from his obstruction, but in
his heart he bitterly cursed the stupid credulity of the natives for
supposing that the blood of the white woman or the child could avail to
put an end to the disasters they were suffering.

Making the natives understand that they were not to follow him, the
magician carried off his burden as easily as a lion would carry a
couple of kids. The lady was still unconscious, and Jack was all but
paralyzed with fright. Once free of the enclosure the _mganga_ crossed
the town, entered the forest, and after a march of three miles, during
which he did not slacken his pace for a moment, reached the bank of a
river which was flowing towards the north.

Here in the cavity of a rock, concealed by drooping foliage, a canoe
was moored, covered with a kind of thatched roof; on this the magician
deposited his burden, and sending the light craft into mid-stream with
a vigorous kick, exclaimed in a cheery voice,--

"Here they are, captain! both of them! Mrs. Weldon and Master Jack,
both! We will be off now! I hope those idiots of Kazonndé will have
plenty more rain yet! Off we go!"




CHAPTER XVII.

DRIFTING DOWN THE STREAM.


"Off we go!" It was the voice of Hercules addressing Dick Sands, who,
frightfully debilitated by recent sufferings, was leaning against
Cousin Benedict for support. Dingo was lying at his feet.

Mrs. Weldon gradually recovered her consciousness. Looking around her
in amazement she caught sight of Dick.

"Dick, is it you?" she muttered feebly.

The lad with some difficulty arose, and took her hand in his, while
Jack overwhelmed him with kisses.

"And who would have thought it was you, Hercules, that carried us
away?" said the child; "I did not know you a bit; you were so
dreadfully ugly."

"I was a sort of a devil, you know, Master Jack," Hercules answered;
"and the devil is not particularly handsome;" and he began rubbing his
chest vigorously to get rid of the white pattern with which he had
adorned it.

Mrs. Weldon held out her hand to him with a grateful smile.

"Yes, Mrs. Weldon, he has saved you, and although he does not own it,
he has saved me too," said Dick.

"Saved!" repeated Hercules, "you must not talk about safety, for you
are not saved yet."

And pointing to Benedict, he continued,--

"That's where your thanks are due; unless he had come and informed me
all about you and where you were, I should have known nothing, and
should have been powerless to aid you."

It was now five days since he had fallen in with the entomologist as he
was chasing the manticora, and unceremoniously had carried him off.

As the canoe drifted rapidly along the stream, Hercules briefly related
his adventures since his escape from the encampment on the Coanza. He
described how he had followed the kitanda which was conveying Mrs.
Weldon; how in the course of his march he had found Dingo badly
wounded; how he and the dog together had reached the neighbourhood of
Kazonndé, and how he had contrived to send a note to Dick, intending to
inform him of Mrs. Weldon's destination. Then he went on to say that
since his unexpected _rencontre_ with Cousin Benedict he had watched
very closely for a chance to get into the guardeddépôt, but until now
had entirely failed. A celebrated _mganga_ had been passing on his way
through the forest, and he had resolved upon impersonating him as a
means of gaining the admittance he wanted. His strength made the
undertaking sufficiently easy; and having stripped the magician of his
paraphernalia, and bound him securely to a tree, he painted his own
body with a pattern like that which he observed on his victim's chest,
and having attired himself with the magical garments was quite equipped
to impose upon the credulous natives. The result of his stratagem they
had all that day witnessed.

He had hardly finished his account of himself when Mrs. Weldon, smiling
at his success, turned to Dick.

"And how, all this time, my dear boy, has it fared with you?" she asked.

Dick said,--

"I remember very little to tell you. I recollect being fastened to a
stake in the river-bed and the water rising and rising till it was
above my head. My last thoughts were about yourself and Jack. Then
everything became a blank, and I knew nothing more until I found myself
amongst the papyrus on the river-bank, with Hercules tending me like a
nurse."

"You see I am the right sort of _mganga_" interposed Hercules; "I am a
doctor as well as a conjurer."

"But tell me, Hercules, how did you save him?"

"Oh, it was not a difficult matter by any means," answered Hercules
modestly; "it was dark, you know, so that at the proper moment it was
quite possible to wade in amongst the poor wretches at the bottom of
the trench, and to wrench the stake from its socket. Anybody could have
done it. Cousin Benedict could have done it. Dingo, too, might have
done it. Perhaps, after all, it was Dingo that did it."

"No, no, Hercules, that won't do," cried Jack; "besides, look, Dingo is
shaking his head; he is telling you he didn't do it."

"Dingo must not tell tales, Master Jack," said Hercules, laughing.

But, nevertheless, although the brave fellow's modesty prompted him to
conceal it, it was clear that he had accomplished a daring feat, of
which few would have ventured to incur the risk.

Inquiry was next made after Tom, Bat, Actæon, and Austin. His
countenance fell, and large tears gathered in his eyes as Hercules told
how he had seen them pass through the forest in a slave-caravan. They
were gone; he feared they were gone for ever.

Mrs. Weldon tried to console him with the hope that they might still be
spared to meet again some day; but he shook his head mournfully. She
then communicated to Dick the terms of the compact that had been
entered into for her own release, and observed that under the
circumstances it might really have been more prudent for her to remain
in Kazonndé.

"Then I have made a mistake; I have been an idiot, in bringing you
away," said Hercules, ever ready to depreciate his own actions.

"No," said Dick; "you have made no mistake; you could not have done
better; those rascals, ten chances to one, will only get Mr. Weldon
into some trap. We must get to Mossamedes before Negoro arrives; once
there, we shall find that the Portuguese authorities will lend us their
protection, and when old Alvez arrives to claim his 100,000 dollars--"

"He shall receive a good thrashing for his pains," said Hercules,
finishing Dick's sentence, and chuckling heartily at the prospect.

It was agreed on all hands that it was most important that Negoro's
arrival at Mossamedes should be forestalled. The plan which Dick had so
long contemplated of reaching the coast by descending some river seemed
now in a fair way of being accomplished, and from the northerly
direction in which they were proceeding it was quite probable that they
would ultimately reach the Zaire, and in that case not actually arrive
at S. Paul de Loanda; but that would be immaterial, as they would be
sure of finding help anywhere in the colonies of Lower Guinea.

On finding himself on the river-bank, Dick's first thought had been to
embark upon one of the floating islands that are continually to be seen
upon the surface of the African streams, but it happened that Hercules
during one of his rambles found a native boat that had run adrift. It
was just the discovery that suited their need. It was one of the long,
narrow canoes, thirty feet in length by three or four in breadth, that
with a large number of paddles can be driven with immense velocity, but
by the aid of a single scull can be safely guided down the current of a
stream.

Dick was somewhat afraid that, to elude observation, it would be
necessary to proceed only by night, but as the loss of twelve hours out
of the twenty-four would double the length of the voyage, he devised
the plan of covering the canoe with a roof of long grass, supported by
a horizontal pole from stem to stern, and this not only afforded a
shelter from the sun, but so effectually concealed the craft,
rudder-scull and all, that the very birds mistook it for one of the
natural islets, and red-beaked gulls, black _arringhas_ and grey and
white kingfishers would frequently alight upon it in search of food.

Though comparatively free from fatigue, the voyage must necessarily be
long, and by no means free from danger, and the daily supply of
provisions was not easy to procure. If fishing failed, Dick had the one
gun which Hercules had carried away with him from the ant-hill, and as
he was by no means a bad shot, he hoped to find plenty of game, either
along the banks or by firing through a loophole in the thatch.

The rate of the current, as far as he could tell, was about two miles
an hour, enough to carry them about fifty miles a day; it was a speed,
however, that made it necessary for them to keep a sharp look-out for
any rocks or submerged trunks of trees, as well as to be on their guard
against rapids and cataracts.

Dick's strength and spirits all revived at the delight of having Mrs.
Weldon and Jack restored to him, and he assumed his post at the bow of
the canoe, directing Hercules how to use the scull at the stern. A
litter of soft grass was made for Mrs. Weldon, who spent most of her
time lying thoughtfully in the shade. Cousin Benedict was very
taciturn; he had not recovered the loss of the manticora, and frowned
ever and again at Hercules, as if he had not yet forgiven him for
stopping him in the chase. Jack, who had been told that he must not be
noisy, amused himself by playing with Dingo.

The first two days passed without any special incident. The stock of
provisions was quite enough for that time, so that there was no need to
disembark, and Dick merely lay to for a few hours in the night to take
a little necessary repose.

The stream nowhere exceeded 150 feet in breadth. The floating islands
moved at the same pace as the canoe, and except from some unforeseen
circumstance, there could be no apprehension of a collision. The banks
were destitute of human inhabitants, but were richly clothed with wild
plants, of which the blossoms were of the most gorgeous colours; the
asclepiae, the gladiolus, the clematis, lilies, aloes, umbelliferae,
arborescent ferns and fragrant shrubs, combining on either hand to make
a border of surpassing beauty. Here and there the forest extended to
the very shore, and copal-trees, acacias with their stiff foliage,
bauhinias clothed with lichen, fig-trees with their masses of pendant
roots, and other trees of splendid growth rose to the height of a
hundred feet, forming a shade which the rays of the sun utterly failed
to penetrate.

[Illustration: Hercules could leave the boat without much fear of
detection.]

Occasionally a wreath of creepers would form an arch from shore to
shore, and on the 27th, to Jack's great delight, a group of monkeys was
seen crossing one of these natural bridges, holding on most carefully
by their tails, lest the aerial pathway should snap beneath their
weight. These monkeys, belonging to a smaller kind of chimpanzee, which
are known in Central Africa by the name of _sokos_, were hideous
creatures with low foreheads, bright yellow faces, and long, upright
ears; they herd in troops of about ten, bark like dogs, and are much
dreaded by the natives on account of their alleged propensity to carry
off young children; there is no telling what predatory designs they
might have formed against Master Jack if they had spied him out, but
Dick's artifice effectually screened him from their observation.

Twenty miles further on the canoe came to a sudden standstill.

"What's the matter now, captain?" cried Hercules from the stern.

"We have drifted on to a grass barrier, and there is no hope for it, we
shall have to cut our way through," answered Dick.

"All right, I dare say we shall manage it," promptly replied Hercules,
leaving his rudder to come in front.

The obstruction was formed by the interlacing of masses of the tough,
glossy grass known by the name of _tikatika_, which, when compressed,
affords a surface so compact and resisting that travellers have been
known by means of it to cross rivers dry-footed. Splendid specimens of
lotus plants had taken root amongst the vegetation.

As it was nearly dark, Hercules could leave the boat without much fear
of detection, and so effectually did he wield his hatchet that, in two
hours after the stoppage, the barrier was hewn asunder, and the light
craft resumed the channel.

It must be owned that it was with a sense of reluctance that Benedict
felt the boat was again beginning to move forward; the whole voyage
appeared to him to be perfectly uninteresting and unnecessary; not a
single insect had he observed since he left Kazonndé, and his most
ardent wish was that he could return there and regain possession of his
invaluable tin box. But an unlooked for gratification was in store for
him.

Hercules, who had been his pupil long enough to have an eye for the
kind of creature Benedict was ever trying to secure, on coming back
from his exertions on the grass-barrier, brought a horrible-looking
animal, and submitted it to the sullen entomologist.

"Is this of any use to you?"

The amateur lifted it up carefully, and having almost poked it into his
near-sighted eyes, uttered a cry of delight,--

"Bravo, Hercules! you are making amends for your past mischief; it is
splendid! it is unique!"

"Is it really very curious?" said Mrs. Weldon.

"Yes, indeed," answered the enraptured naturalist; "it is really
unique; it belongs to neither of the ten orders; it can be classed
neither with the coleoptera, neuroptera, nor to the hymenoptera: if it
had eight legs I should know how to classify it; I should place it
amongst the second section of the arachnida; but it is a hexapod, a
genuine hexapod; a spider with six legs; a grand discovery; it must be
entered on the catalogue as 'Hexapodes Benedictus.'" Once again
mounted on his hobby, the worthy enthusiast continued to discourse with
an unwonted vivacity to his indulgent ii* not over attentive audience.

Meanwhile the canoe was steadily threading its way over the dark
waters, the silence of the night broken only by the rattle of the
scales of some crocodiles, or by the snorting of hippopotamuses in the
neighbourhood. Once the travellers were startled by a loud noise, such
as might proceed from some ponderous machinery in motion: it was caused
by a troop of a hundred or more elephants that, after feasting through
the day on the roots of the forest, had come to quench their thirst at
the river-side.

[Illustration: It was caused by a troop of a hundred or more elephants.]

But no danger was to be apprehended; lighted by the pale moon that rose
over the tall trees, the canoe throughout the night pursued in safety
its solitary voyage.




CHAPTER XVIII.

AN ANXIOUS VOYAGE.


Thus the canoe drifted on for a week, the forests that for many miles
had skirted the river ultimately giving place to extensive jungles that
stretched far away to the horizon. Destitute, fortunately for the
travellers, of human inhabitants, the district abounded in a large
variety of animal life; zebras, elands, caamas, sported on the bank,
disappearing at night-fall before howling leopards and roaring lions.

It was Dick's general custom, as he lay to for a while in the
afternoon, to go ashore in search of food, and as the manioc, maize,
and sorghum that were to be found were of a wild growth and
consequently not fit for consumption, he was obliged to run the risk of
using his gun. On the 4th of July he succeeded by a single shot in
killing _pokoo_, a kind of antelope about five feet long, with
annulated horns, a tawny skin dappled with bright spots, and a white
belly. The venison proved excellent, and was roasted over a fire
procured by the primitive method, practised, it is said, even by
gorillas, of rubbing two sticks together.

In spite of these halts, and the time taken for the night's rest, the
distance accomplished by the 8th could not be estimated at less than a
hundred miles. The river, augmented by only a few insignificant
tributaries, had not materially increased in volume; its direction,
however, had slightly changed more to the north-west. It afforded a
very fair supply of fish, which were caught by lines made of the long
stems of creepers furnished with thorns instead of fish-hooks, a
considerable proportion being the delicate _sandjtkas_, which when
dried may be transported to any climate; besides these there were the
black _usakas_, the wide-headed _monndés_, and occasionally the little
_dagalas_, resembling Thames whitebait.

[Illustration: He stood face to face with his foe.]

Next day, Dick met with an adventure that put all his courage and
composure to the test. He had noticed the horns of a caama projecting
above the brushwood, and went ashore alone with the intention of
securing it. He succeeded in getting tolerably close to it and fired,
but he was terribly startled when a formidable creature bounded along
some thirty paces ahead, and took possession of the prey he had just
wounded.

It was a majestic lion, at least five feet in height, of the kind
called _káramoo_, in distinction to the maneless species known as the
_Nyassi-lion_. Before Dick had time to reload, the huge brute had
caught sight of him, and without relaxing its hold upon the writhing
antelope beneath its claws, glared upon him fiercely. Dick's presence
of mind did not forsake him; flight he knew was not to be thought of;
his only chance he felt intuitively would be by keeping perfectly
still; and aware that the beast would be unlikely to give up a
struggling prey for another that was motionless, he stood face to face
with his foe, not venturing to move an eyelid. In a few minutes the
lion's patience seemed to be exhausted; with a grand stateliness, it
picked up the caama as easily as a dog would lift a hare, turned round,
and lashing the bushes with its tail, disappeared in the jungle.

It took Dick some little time to recover himself sufficiently to return
to the canoe. On arriving, he said nothing of the peril to which he had
been exposed, but heartily congratulated himself that they had means of
transport without making their way through jungles and forests.

As they advanced, they repeatedly came across evidences that the
country had not been always, as now it was, utterly devoid of
population; more than once, they observed traces which betokened the
former existence of villages; either some ruined palisades or the
_débris_ of some thatched huts, or some solitary sacred tree within an
enclosure would indicate that the death of a chief had, according to
custom, made a native tribe migrate to new quarters.

If natives were still dwelling in the district, as was just probable,
they must have been living underground, only emerging at night like
beasts of prey, from which they were only a grade removed.

Dick Sands had every reason to feel convinced that cannibalism had been
practised in the neighbourhood, Three times, as he was wandering in the
forest, he had come upon piles of ashes and half-charred human bones,
the remnants, no doubt, of a ghastly meal, and although he mentioned
nothing of what he had seen to Mrs. Weldon, he made up his mind to go
ashore as seldom as possible, and as often as he found it absolutely
necessary to go, he gave Hercules strict directions to push off into
mid-stream at the very first intimation of danger.

A new cause of anxiety arose on the following evening, and made it
necessary for them to take the most guarded measures of precaution. The
river-bed had widened out into a kind of lagoon, and on the right side
of this, built upon piles in the water, not only was there a collection
of about thirty huts, but the fires gleaming under the thatch, made it
evident that they were all inhabited. Unfortunately the only channel of
the stream flowed close under the huts, the river elsewhere being so
obstructed with rocks that navigation of any kind was impossible.
Nothing was more probable than that the natives would have set their
nets all across the piles, and if so, the canoe would be sure to be
obstructed, and an alarm must inevitably be raised. Every caution
seemed to be unavailing, because the canoe must follow the stream;
however, in the lowest of whispers Dick ordered Hercules to keep clear
as much as he could of the worm-eaten timber. The night was not very
dark, which was equally an advantage and a disadvantage, as while it
permitted those on board to steer as they wanted, it did not prevent
them from being seen.

The situation became more and more critical. About a hundred feet
ahead, the channel was very contracted; two natives, gesticulating
violently, were seen squatting on the pilework; a few moments more and
their voices could be heard; it was obvious that they had seen the
floating mass; apprehending that it was going to destroy their nets,
they yelled aloud and shouted for assistance; instantly five or six
negroes scrambled down the piles, and perched themselves upon the
cross-beams.

On board the canoe the profoundest silence was maintained. Dick only
signalled his directions to Hercules, without uttering a word, while
Jack performed his part by holding Dingo's mouth tightly closed, to
stop the low growlings which the faithful watch-dog seemed resolved to
make; but fortunately every sound was overpowered by the rushing of the
stream and the clamour of the negroes, as they hurriedly drew in their
nets. If they should raise them in time, all might be well, but if, on
the other hand, the canoe should get entangled, the consequences could
hardly fail to be disastrous. The current in its narrow channel was so
strong that Dick was powerless either to modify his course or to
slacken it.

Half a minute more, and the canoe was right under the woodwork, but the
efforts of the natives had already elevated the nets so that the
anticipated danger was happily escaped; but it chanced that in making
its way through the obstacle, a large piece of the grass-thatch got
detached. One of the negroes raised a sudden shout of alarm, and it
seemed only too probable that he had caught a sight of the travellers
below and was informing his companions. This apprehension, too, was
only momentary; the current had changed almost to a rapid, and carried
the canoe along with such velocity that the lacustrine village was
quickly out of sight.

"Steer to the left!" cried Dick, finding that the riverbed had again
become clear.

A stiff pull at the tiller made the craft fly in that direction.

Dick went to the stern, and scanned the moonlit waters. All was
perfectly still, no canoe was in pursuit; perhaps the natives had not
one to use; but certain it was that when daylight dawned no vestige of
an inhabitant was to be seen. Nevertheless Dick thought it prudent for
a while to steer close under the shelter of the left-hand shore.

[Illustration: Instantly five or six negroes scrambled down the piles.]

By the end of the next four days the aspect of the country had
undergone a remarkable change, the jungle having given place to a
desert as dreary as the Kalahari itself. The river appeared
interminable, and it became a matter of serious consideration how to
get a sufficiency of food. Fish was scarce, or at least hard to catch,
and the arid soil provided no means of sustenance for antelopes, so
that nothing was to be gained from the chase. Carnivorous animals also
had quite disappeared, and the silence of the night was broken, not by
the roar of wild beasts, but by the croaking of frogs in a discordant
chorus, which Cameron has compared to the clanking of hammers and the
grating of files in a ship-builder's yard.

Far away both to the east and west the outlines of hills could be
faintly discerned, but the shores on either hand were perfectly flat
and devoid of trees. Euphorbias, it is true, grew in considerable
numbers, but as they were only of the oil-producing species, and not
the kind from which cassava or manioc is procured, they were useless in
an alimentary point of view.

Dick was becoming more and more perplexed, when Hercules happened to
mention that the natives often eat young fern-fronds and the pith of
the papyrus, and that before now he had himself been reduced to the
necessity of subsisting on nothing better.

"We must try them," said Dick.

Both ferns and papyrus abounded on the banks, and a meal was prepared,
the sweet soft pith of the papyrus being found very palatable. Jack in
particular appeared to enjoy it extremely, but it was not in any way a
satisfying diet.

Thanks to Cousin Benedict, a fresh variety in the matter of food was
found on the following day. Since the discovery of the "Hexapodes
Benedictus" he had recovered his spirits, and, having fastened his
prize safely inside his hat, he wandered about, as often as he had a
chance, in his favourite pursuit of insect-hunting. As he was rummaging
in the long grass, he put up a bird which flew but a very short
distance. Benedict recognized it by its peculiar note, and, seeing Dick
take his gun to aim at it, exclaimed,--

"Don't fire, don't fire! that bird will be worth nothing for food among
five of us."

"It will be dinner enough for Jack," said Dick, who, finding that the
bird did not seem in a hurry to make its escape, delayed his shot for a
moment, without intending to be diverted from his purpose of securing
it.

"You mustn't fire," insisted Benedict, "it is an indicator; it will
show you where there are lots of honey."

Aware that a few pounds of honey would really be of more value than a
little bird, Dick lowered his gun, and in company with the entomologist
set off to follow the indicator, which seemed, by alternately flying
and stopping, to be inviting them to come on, and they had but a little
way to go before they observed several swarms of bees buzzing around
some old stems hidden amongst the euphorbias. Notwithstanding
Benedict's remonstrances against depriving the bees of the fruits of
their industry, Dick instantly set to work, and without remorse
suffocated them by burning dry grass underneath. Having secured a good
amount of honey, he left the comb to the indicator as its share of the
booty, and went back with his companion to the canoe.

The honey was acceptable, but it did not do much to alleviate the
cravings of hunger.

Next day it happened that they had just stopped for their accustomed
rest, when they observed that an enormous swarm of grasshoppers had
settled at the mouth of a creek close by. Two or three deep they
covered the soil, myriads and myriads of them adhering to every shrub.

"The natives eat those grasshoppers," said Benedict, "and like them
too."

The remark produced an instant effect; all hands were busied in
collecting them, and a large supply was quickly gathered: the canoe
might have been filled ten times over.

Grilled over a slow fire, they were found to be very palatable eating,
and, spite of his qualms of conscience, Benedict himself made a hearty
meal.

But although the gnawings of absolute hunger were thus assuaged, all
the travellers began to long most anxiously for the voyage to come to
an end. The mode of transit indeed might be less exhausting to the
bodily powers than a land march would have been, but the excessive heat
by day, the damp mists at night, and the incessant attacks of
mosquitoes, all combined to render the passage extremely trying. There
was no telling how long it would last, and Dick was equally uncertain
whether it might end in a few days, or be protracted for a month. The
direction which the stream was taking was itself a subject of
perplexity.

A fresh surprise was now in store.

As Jack, a few mornings afterwards, was standing at the bow peering
through an aperture in the grass canopy above him, he suddenly turned
round and cried,--

"The sea! the sea!"

Dick started forwards, and looked eagerly in the same direction.

A large expanse of water was visible in the horizon, but after having
surveyed it for a moment or two, he said,--

"No, Jack, it is not the sea, it is a great river; it is running west,
and I suppose this river runs into it. Perhaps it is the Zaire."

"Let us hope it is," said Mrs. Weldon earnestly.

Most cordially did Dick Sands re-echo her words, being well aware that
at the mouth of that river were Portuguese villages, where a refuge
might assuredly be found.

For several succeeding days the canoe, still concealed by its covering,
floated on the silvery surface of this new-found stream. On either side
the banks became less arid, and there seemed everything to encourage
the few survivors of the "Pilgrim" to believe that they would soon see
the last of the perils and toils of their journey.

They were too sanguine. Towards three o'clock on the morning of the
18th, Dick, who was at his usual post at the bow, fancied he heard a
dull rumbling towards the west. Mrs. Weldon, Jack, and Benedict were
all asleep. Calling Hercules to him, he asked him whether he could not
hear a strange noise. The night was perfectly calm, and not a breath of
air was stirring. The negro listened attentively, and suddenly, his
eyes sparkling with delight, exclaimed,--

"Yes, captain, I hear the sea!"

Dick shook his head and answered,--

"It is not the sea, Hercules."

"Not the sea!" cried the negro, "then what can it be?"

"We must wait till daybreak," replied Dick, "and meanwhile we shall
have to keep a sharp look-out."

Hercules returned to his place, but only to continue listening with
ever-increasing curiosity. The rumbling perceptibly increased till it
became a continued roar.

With scarcely any intervening twilight night passed into day. Just in
front, scarcely more than half a mile ahead, a great mist was hanging
over the river; it was not an ordinary fog, and when the sun rose, the
light of the dawn caused a brilliant rainbow to arch itself from shore
to shore.

In a voice so loud that it awoke Mrs. Weldon, Dick gave his order to
Hercules to steer for the bank:--

"Quick, quick, Hercules! ashore! ashore! there are cataracts close
ahead!"

And so it was. Within little more than a quarter of a mile the bed of
the river sank abruptly some hundred feet, and the foaming waters
rushed down in a magnificent fall with irresistible velocity. A few
minutes more and the canoe must have been swallowed in the deep abyss.




CHAPTER XIX.

AN ATTACK.


The canoe inclined to the west readily enough; the fall in the
river-bed was so sudden that the current remained quite unaffected by
the cataract at a distance of three hundred yards.

On the bank were woods so dense that sunlight could not penetrate the
shade. Dick was conscious of a sad misgiving when he looked at the
character of the territory through which they must necessarily pass. It
did not seem practicable by any means to convey the canoe below the
falls.

As they neared the shore, Dingo became intensely agitated. At first
Dick suspected that a wild beast or a native might be lurking in the
papyrus, but it soon became obvious that the dog was excited by grief
rather than by rage.

"Dingo is crying," said Jack; "poor Dingo!" and the child laid his arms
over the creature's neck.

The dog, however, was too impatient to be caressed; bounding away, he
sprang into the water, swam across the twenty feet that intervened
between the shore, and disappeared in the grass.

In a few moments the boat had glided on to a carpet of confervas and
other aquatic plants, starting a few kingfishers and some snow-white
herons. Hercules moored it to the stump of a tree, and the travellers
went ashore.

There was no pathway through the forest, only the trampled moss showed
that the place had been recently visited either by animals or men.

[Illustration: Upon the smooth wood were two great letters in dingy
red.]

Dick took his gun and Hercules his hatchet, and they set out to search
for Dingo. They had not far to go before they saw him with his nose
close to the ground, manifestly following a scent; the animal raised
his head for a moment, as if beckoning them to follow, and kept on till
he reached an old sycamore-stump. Having called out to the rest of the
party to join them, Dick made his way farther into the wood till he got
up to Dingo, who was whining piteously at the entrance of a dilapidated
hut.

The rest were not long in following, and they all entered the hut
together. The floor was strewn with bones whitened by exposure.

"Some one has died here," said Mrs. Weldon.

"Perhaps," added Dick, as if struck by a sudden thought, "it was
Dingo's old master. Look at him! he is pointing with his paw."

The portion of the sycamore-trunk which formed the farther side of the
hut had been stripped of its bark, and upon the smooth wood were two
great letters in dingy red almost effaced by time, but yet plain enough
to be distinguished.

"S. V.," cried Dick, as he looked where the dog's paw rested; "the same
initials that Dingo has upon his collar. There can be no mistake. S. V."

A small copper box, green with verdigris, caught his eye, and he picked
it up. It was open, but contained a scrap of discoloured paper. The
writing upon this consisted of a few sentences, of which only detached
words could be made out, but they revealed the sad truth only too
plainly.

"Robbed by Negoro--murdered--Dingo--help--Negoro guide--120 miles from
coast--December 3rd, 1871--write no more.

"S. VERNON."

Here was the clue to a melancholy story. Samuel Vernon, under the
guidance of Negoro, and taking with him his dog Dingo, had set out on
an exploration of a district of Central Africa; he had taken a
considerable quantity of money to procure the necessary supplies on the
way, and this had excited the cupidity of his guide, who seized the
opportunity, whilst they were encamping on the banks of the Congo, to
assassinate his employer, and get possession of his property. Negoro,
however, had not escaped; he had fallen into the hands of the
Portuguese, by whom he was recognized as an agent of the slave-dealer
Alvez, and condemned to spend the rest of his days in prison. He
contrived after a while to make his escape, and, as has been already
mentioned, found his way to New Zealand, whence he had returned by
securing an engagement on board the "Pilgrim." Between the time when he
was attacked by Negoro and the moment of his death, Vernon had managed
to write the few brief lines of which the fragments still survived, and
to deposit the document in the box from which the money had been
stolen, and by a last effort had traced out his initials in blood upon
the naked wood which formed the wall of the hut. For many days Dingo
watched beside his master, and throughout that time his eyes were
resting so perpetually upon the two crimson letters in front of him,
that mere instinct seemed to fasten them indelibly on his memory.
Quitting his watch one day, perhaps to pacify his hunger, the dog
wandered to the coast, where he was picked up by the captain of the
"Waldeck," afterwards to be transferred to the very ship on which his
owner's murderer had been engaged as cook.

All throughout this time poor Vernon's bones had been bleaching in the
African forest, and the first resolution of Dick and Mrs. Weldon was to
give the residue of his remains some semblance of a decent burial. They
were just proceeding to their task when Dingo gave a furious growl, and
dashed out of the hut; another moment, and a terrible shriek made it
evident that he was in conflict with some dread antagonist.

Hercules was quickly in pursuit, and the whole party followed in time
to witness the giant hurl himself upon a man with whom already Dingo
was in mortal combat.

[Illustration: The dog was griping the man by the throat]

The dog was griping the man by the throat, the man was lifting his
cutlass high above the head of the dog.

That man was Negoro. The rascal, on getting his letter at Kazonndé,
instead of embarking at once for America, had left his native escort
for a while, and returned to the scene of his crime to secure the
treasure which he had left buried at a little distance in a spot that
he had marked. At this very moment he was in the act of digging up the
gold he had concealed; some glistening coins scattered here and there
betrayed his purpose; but in the midst of his labours he had been
startled by the dashing forward of a dog; another instant, and the dog
had fixed itself upon his throat, whilst he, in an agony of
desperation, had drawn his cutlass and plunged it deep into the
creature's side.

Hercules came up at the very climax of the death-struggle.

"You villain! you accursed villain! I have you now!" he cried, about to
seize hold of his victim.

But vengeance was already accomplished. Negoro gave no sign of life;
death had overtaken him on the very scene of his guilt. Dingo, too, had
received a mortal wound; he dragged himself back to the hut, lay down
beside the remains of his master, and expired.

The sad task of burying Vernon's bones, and laying his faithful dog
beside them having been accomplished, the whole party was obliged to
turn their thoughts to their own safety. Although Negoro was dead, it
as very likely that the natives that he had taken with him were at no
great distance, and would come to search for him.

A hurried conference was held as to what steps had best be taken. The
few words traceable on the paper made them aware that they were on the
banks of the Congo, and that they were still 120 miles from the coast.
The fall just ahead was probably the cataract of Memo, but whatever it
was, no doubt it effectually barred their farther progress by water.
There seemed no alternative but that they should make their way by one
bank or the other a mile or two below the waterfall, and there
construct a raft on which once again they could drift down the stream.
The question that pressed for immediate settlement was which bank it
should be. Here, on the left bank, would be the greater risk of
encountering the negro escort of Negoro, while as to the farther shore
they could not tell what obstacles it might present.

Altogether Mrs. Weldon advocated trying the other side, but Dick
insisted upon crossing first by himself to ascertain whether an advance
by that route were really practicable.

"The river is only about 100 yards wide," he urged; "I can soon get
across. I shall leave Hercules to look after you all."

Mrs. Weldon demurred for a while, but Dick seemed resolute, and as he
promised to take his gun and not to attempt to land if he saw the least
symptom of danger, she at last consented, but with so much reluctance
that even after he had entered the canoe she said,--

"I think, Dick, it would be really better for us all to go together."

"No, Mrs. Weldon, indeed, no; I am sure it is best for me to go alone;
I shall be back in an hour."

"If it must be so, it must," said the lady.

"Keep a sharp look-out, Hercules!" cried the youth cheerily, as he
pushed off from the land.

The strength of the current was by no means violent, but quite enough
to make the direction of Dick's course somewhat oblique. The roar of
the cataract reverberated in his ears, and the spray, wafted by the
westerly wind, brushed lightly past his face, and he shuddered as he
felt how near they must have been to destruction if he had relaxed his
watch throughout the night.

It took him hardly a quarter of an hour to reach the opposite bank, and
he was just preparing to land when there arose a tremendous shout from
about a dozen natives, who, rushing forward, began to tear away the
canopy of grass with which the canoe was covered.

Dick's horror was great. It would have been greater still if he had
known that they were cannibals. They were the natives settled at the
lacustrine village higher up the river. When the piece of thatch had
been knocked off in passing the piles a glimpse had been caught of the
passengers below, and aware that the cataract ahead must ultimately
bring them to a standstill, the eager barbarians had followed them
persistently day by day for the last eight days.

Now they thought they had secured their prize, but loud was their yell
of disappointment when on stripping off the thatch they found only one
person, and that a mere boy, standing beneath it.

Dick stood as calmly as he could at the bow, and pointed his gun
towards the savages, who were sufficiently acquainted with the nature
of fire-arms to make them afraid to attack him.

Mrs. Weldon with the others, in their eagerness to watch Dick's
movements, had remained standing upon the shore of the river, and at
this instant were caught sight of by one of the natives, who pointed
them out to his companions. A sudden impulse seized the whole of them,
and they sprang into the canoe; there seemed to be a practised hand
amongst them, which caught hold of the rudder-oar, and the little craft
was quickly on its way back.

Although he gave up all as now well-nigh lost, Dick neither moved nor
spoke. He had one lingering hope yet left. Was it not possible even now
that by sacrificing his own life he could save the lives of those that
were entrusted to him?

When the canoe had come near enough to the shore for his voice to be
heard, he shouted with all his might,--

"Fly, Mrs. Weldon; fly, all of you; fly for your lives!"

But neither Mrs. Weldon nor Hercules stirred; they seemed rooted to the
ground.

"Fly, fly, fly!" he continued shouting.

But though he knew they must hear him, yet he saw them make no effort
to escape. He understood their meaning; of what avail was flight when
the savages would be upon their track in a few minutes after?

A sudden thought crossed his mind. He raised his gun and fired at the
man who was steering; the bullet shattered the rudder-scull into
fragments.

The cannibals uttered a yell of terror. Deprived of guidance, the canoe
was at the mercy of the current, and, borne along with increasing
speed, was soon within a hundred feet of the cataract.

The anxious watchers on the bank instantly discerned Dick's purpose,
and understood that in order to save them he had formed the resolution
of precipitating himself with the savages into the seething waters.

Nothing could avail to arrest the swift descent. Mrs Weldon in an agony
of despair waved her hands in a last sad farewell, Jack and Benedict
seemed paralyzed, whilst Hercules involuntarily extended his great
strong arm that was powerless to aid.

Suddenly the natives, impelled by a last frantic effort to reach the
shore, plunged into the water, but then movement capsized the boat.

Face to face with death, Dick lost nothing of his indomitable presence
of mind. Might not that light canoe, floating bottom upwards, be made
the means for yet another grasp at life? The danger that threatened him
was twofold, there was the risk of suffocation as well as the peril of
being drowned; could not the inverted canoe be used for a kind of float
at once to keep his head above water and to serve as a screen from the
rushing air? He had some faint recollection of how it had been proved
possible under some such conditions to descend in safety the falls of
Niagara.

Quick as lightning he seized hold of the cross-bench of the canoe, and
with his head out of water beneath the upturned keel, he was dashed
down the furious and well-nigh perpendicular fall.

The craft sank deep into the abyss, but rose quickly again to the
surface. Here was Dick's chance, he was a good swimmer, and his life
depended now upon his strength of arm.

It was a hard struggle, but he succeeded. In a quarter of an hour he
had landed on the left hand bank, where he was greeted with the joyful
congratulations of his friends, who had hurried to the foot of the fall
to assure themselves of his fate.

[Illustration: The bullet shattered the rudder scull into fragments]

The cannibals had all disappeared in the surging waters. Unprotected in
their fall, they had doubtless ceased to breathe before reaching the
lowest depths of the cataract where their lifeless bodies would soon be
dashed to pieces against the sharp rocks that were scattered along the
lower course of the stream.




CHAPTER XX.

A HAPPY REUNION.


Two days after Dick's marvellous deliverance the party had the good
fortune to fall in with a caravan of honest Portuguese ivory-traders on
their way to Emboma, at the mouth of the Congo. They rendered the
fugitives every assistance, and thus enabled them to reach the coast
without further discomfort.

This meeting with the caravan was a most fortunate occurrence, as any
project of launching a raft upon the Zaire would have been quite
impracticable, the river between the Ntemo and Yellala Falls being a
continuous series of cataracts. Stanley counted as many as sixty-two,
and it was hereabouts that that brave traveller sustained the last of
thirty-one conflicts with the natives, escaping almost by a miracle
from the Mbelo cataract.

Before the middle of August the party arrived at Emboma, where they
were hospitably received by M. Motta Viega and Mr. Harrison. A steamer
was just on the point of starting for the Isthmus of Panama; in this
they took their passage, and in due time set foot once more upon
American soil.

Forthwith a message was despatched to Mr. Weldon, apprising him of the
return of the wife and child over whose loss he had mourned so long On
the 25th the railroad deposited the travellers at San Francisco, the
only thing to mar their happiness being the recollection that Tom and
his partners were not with them to share their joy.

Mr. Weldon had every reason to congratulate himself that Negoro had
failed to reach him. No doubt he would have been ready to sacrifice the
bulk of his fortune, and without a moment's hesitation would have set
out for the coast of Africa, but who could question that he would there
have been exposed to the vilest treachery? He felt that to Dick Sands
and to Hercules he owed a debt of gratitude that it would be impossible
to repay; Dick assumed more than ever the place of an adopted son,
whilst the brave negro was regarded as a true and faithful friend.

Cousin Benedict, it must be owned, failed to share for long the general
joy. After giving Mr. Weldon a hasty shake of the hand, he hurried off
to his private room, and resumed his studies almost as if they had
never been interrupted. He set himself vigorously to work with the
design of producing an elaborate treatise upon the "Hexapodes
Benedictus" hitherto unknown to entomological research. Here in his
private chamber spectacles and magnifying-glass were ready for his use,
and he was now able for the first time with the aid of proper
appliances to examine the unique production of Central Africa.

A shriek of horror and disappointment escaped his lips. The Hexapodes
Benedictus was not a hexapod at all. It was a common spider. Hercules,
in catching it, had unfortunately broken off its two front legs, and
Benedict, almost blind as he was, had failed to detect the accident.
His chagrin was most pitiable, the wonderful discovery that was to have
exalted his name high in the annals of science belonged simply to the
common order of the arachnidæ The blow to his aspirations was very
heavy; it brought on a fit of illness from which it took him some time
to recover.

For the next three years Dick was entrusted with the education of
little Jack during the intervals he could spare from the prosecution of
his own studies, into which he threw himself with an energy quickened
by a kind of remorse.

"If only I had known what a seaman ought to know when I was left to
myself on board the 'Pilgrim,'" he would continually say, "what misery
and suffering we might have been spared!"

So diligently did he apply himself to the technical branches of his
profession that at the age of eighteen he received a special
certificate of honour, and was at once raised to the rank of a captain
in Mr. Weldon's firm.

Thus by his industry and good conduct did the poor foundling of Sandy
Hook rise to a post of distinction. In spite of his youth, he commanded
universal respect; his native modesty and straightforwardness never
failed him, and for his own part, he seemed to be unconscious of those
fine traits in his character which had impelled him to deeds that made
him little short of a hero.

His leisure moments, however, were often troubled by one source of
sadness; he could never forget the four negroes for whose misfortunes
he held himself by his own inexperience to be in a way responsible.
Mrs. Weldon thoroughly shared his regret, and would have made many
sacrifices to discover what had become of them. This anxiety was at
length relieved.

Owing to the large correspondence of Mr. Weldon in almost every quarter
of the world, it was discovered that the whole of them had been sold in
one lot, and that they were now in Madagascar. Without listening for a
moment to Dick's proposal to apply all his savings to effect their
liberation, Mr. Weldon set his own agents to negotiate for their
freedom, and on the 15th of November, 1877, Tom, Bat, Actæon, and
Austin awaited their welcome at the merchant's door. It is needless to
say how warm were the greetings they received.

Out of all the survivors of the "Pilgrim" that had been cast upon the
fatal coast of Africa, old Nan alone was wanting to complete the
number. Considering what they had all undergone, and the perils to
which they had been exposed, it seemed little short of a miracle that
she and poor Dingo should be the only victims.

High was the festivity that night in the house of the Californian
merchant, and the toast, proposed at Mrs. Weldon's request, that was
received with the loudest acclamation was

"DICK SANDS, THE BOY CAPTAIN!"



THE END.










End of Project Gutenberg's Dick Sands the Boy Captain, by Jules Verne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DICK SANDS THE BOY CAPTAIN ***

***** This file should be named 9150-8.txt or 9150-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/1/5/9150/

Produced by Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
PRELIMINARY CHAPTER,

RESUMING THE FIRST PART OF THE WORK AND SERVING AS AN INTRODUCTION TO
THE SECOND.


A few years ago the world was suddenly astounded by hearing of an
experiment of a most novel and daring nature, altogether unprecedented
in the annals of science. The BALTIMORE GUN CLUB, a society of
artillerymen started in America during the great Civil War, had
conceived the idea of nothing less than establishing direct
communication with the Moon by means of a projectile! President
Barbican, the originator of the enterprise, was strongly encouraged in
its feasibility by the astronomers of Cambridge Observatory, and took
upon himself to provide all the means necessary to secure its success.
Having realized by means of a public subscription the sum of nearly five
and a half millions of dollars, he immediately set himself to work at
the necessary gigantic labors.

In accordance with the Cambridge men's note, the cannon intended to
discharge the projectile was to be planted in some country not further
than 28° north or south from the equator, so that it might be aimed
vertically at the Moon in the zenith. The bullet was to be animated with
an initial velocity of 12,000 yards to the second. It was to be fired
off on the night of December 1st, at thirteen minutes and twenty seconds
before eleven o'clock, precisely. Four days afterwards it was to hit the
Moon, at the very moment that she reached her _perigee_, that is to say,
her nearest point to the Earth, about 228,000 miles distant.

The leading members of the Club, namely President Barbican, Secretary
Marston, Major Elphinstone and General Morgan, forming the executive
committee, held several meetings to discuss the shape and material of
the bullet, the nature and position of the cannon, and the quantity and
quality of the powder. The decision soon arrived at was as follows:
1st--The bullet was to be a hollow aluminium shell, its diameter nine
feet, its walls a foot in thickness, and its weight 19,250 pounds;
2nd--The cannon was to be a columbiad 900 feet in length, a well of that
depth forming the vertical mould in which it was to be cast, and
3rd--The powder was to be 400 thousand pounds of gun cotton, which, by
developing more than 200 thousand millions of cubic feet of gas under
the projectile, would easily send it as far as our satellite.

These questions settled, Barbican, aided by Murphy, the Chief Engineer
of the Cold Spring Iron Works, selected a spot in Florida, near the 27th
degree north latitude, called Stony Hill, where after the performance of
many wonderful feats in mining engineering, the Columbiad was
successfully cast.

Things had reached this state when an incident occurred which excited
the general interest a hundred fold.

A Frenchman from Paris, Michel Ardan by name, eccentric, but keen and
shrewd as well as daring, demanded, by the Atlantic telegraph,
permission to be enclosed in the bullet so that he might be carried to
the Moon, where he was curious to make certain investigations. Received
in America with great enthusiasm, Ardan held a great meeting,
triumphantly carried his point, reconciled Barbican to his mortal foe, a
certain Captain M'Nicholl, and even, by way of clinching the
reconciliation, induced both the newly made friends to join him in his
contemplated trip to the Moon.

The bullet, so modified as to become a hollow conical cylinder with
plenty of room inside, was further provided with powerful water-springs
and readily-ruptured partitions below the floor, intended to deaden the
dreadful concussion sure to accompany the start. It was supplied with
provisions for a year, water for a few months, and gas for nearly two
weeks. A self-acting apparatus, of ingenious construction, kept the
confined atmosphere sweet and healthy by manufacturing pure oxygen and
absorbing carbonic acid. Finally, the Gun Club had constructed, at
enormous expense, a gigantic telescope, which, from the summit of Long's
Peak, could pursue the Projectile as it winged its way through the
regions of space. Everything at last was ready.

On December 1st, at the appointed moment, in the midst of an immense
concourse of spectators, the departure took place, and, for the first
time in the world's history, three human beings quitted our terrestrial
globe with some possibility in their favor of finally reaching a point
of destination in the inter-planetary spaces. They expected to
accomplish their journey in 97 hours, 13 minutes and 20 seconds,
consequently reaching the Lunar surface precisely at midnight on
December 5-6, the exact moment when the Moon would be full.

Unfortunately, the instantaneous explosion of such a vast quantity of
gun-cotton, by giving rise to a violent commotion in the atmosphere,
generated so much vapor and mist as to render the Moon invisible for
several nights to the innumerable watchers in the Western Hemisphere,
who vainly tried to catch sight of her.

In the meantime, J.T. Marston, the Secretary of the Gun Club, and a most
devoted friend of Barbican's, had started for Long's Peak, Colorado, on
the summit of which the immense telescope, already alluded to, had been
erected; it was of the reflecting kind, and possessed power sufficient
to bring the Moon within a distance of five miles. While Marston was
prosecuting his long journey with all possible speed, Professor
Belfast, who had charge of the telescope, was endeavoring to catch a
glimpse of the Projectile, but for a long time with no success. The
hazy, cloudy weather lasted for more than a week, to the great disgust
of the public at large. People even began to fear that further
observation would have to be deferred to the 3d of the following month,
January, as during the latter half of December the waning Moon could not
possibly give light enough to render the Projectile visible.

At last, however, to the unbounded satisfaction of all, a violent
tempest suddenly cleared the sky, and on the 13th of December, shortly
after midnight, the Moon, verging towards her last quarter, revealed
herself sharp and bright on the dark background of the starry firmament.

That same morning, a few hours before Marston's arrival at the summit of
Long's Peak, a very remarkable telegram had been dispatched by Professor
Belfast to the Smithsonian Institute, Washington. It announced:

That on December 13th, at 2 o'clock in the morning, the Projectile shot
from Stony Hill had been perceived by Professor Belfast and his
assistants; that, deflected a little from its course by some unknown
cause, it had not reached its mark, though it had approached near enough
to be affected by the Lunar attraction; and that, its rectilineal motion
having become circular, it should henceforth continue to describe a
regular orbit around the Moon, of which in fact it had become the
Satellite. The dispatch went on further to state:

That the _elements_ of the new heavenly body had not yet been
calculated, as at least three different observations, taken at different
times, were necessary to determine them. The distance of the Projectile
from the Lunar surface, however, might be set down roughly at roughly
2833 miles.

The dispatch concluded with the following hypotheses, positively
pronounced to be the only two possible: Either, 1, The Lunar attraction
would finally prevail, in which case the travellers would reach their
destination; or 2, The Projectile, kept whirling forever in an immutable
orbit, would go on revolving around the Moon till time should be no
more.

In either alternative, what should be the lot of the daring adventurers?
They had, it is true, abundant provisions to last them for some time,
but even supposing that they did reach the Moon and thereby completely
establish the practicability of their daring enterprise, how were they
ever to get back? _Could_ they ever get back? or ever even be heard
from? Questions of this nature, freely discussed by the ablest pens of
the day, kept the public mind in a very restless and excited condition.

We must be pardoned here for making a little remark which, however,
astronomers and other scientific men of sanguine temperament would do
well to ponder over. An observer cannot be too cautious in announcing to
the public his discovery when it is of a nature purely speculative.
Nobody is obliged to discover a planet, or a comet, or even a satellite,
but, before announcing to the world that you have made such a discovery,
first make sure that such is really the fact. Because, you know, should
it afterwards come out that you have done nothing of the kind, you make
yourself a butt for the stupid jokes of the lowest newspaper scribblers.
Belfast had never thought of this. Impelled by his irrepressible rage
for discovery--the _furor inveniendi_ ascribed to all astronomers by
Aurelius Priscus--he had therefore been guilty of an indiscretion highly
un-scientific when his famous telegram, launched to the world at large
from the summit of the Rocky Mountains, pronounced so dogmatically on
the only possible issues of the great enterprise.

The truth was that his telegram contained _two_ very important errors:
1. Error of _observation_, as facts afterwards proved; the Projectile
_was_ not seen on the 13th and _could_ not have been on that day, so
that the little black spot which Belfast professed to have seen was most
certainly not the Projectile; 2. Error of _theory_ regarding the final
fate of the Projectile, since to make it become the Moon's satellite was
flying in the face of one of the great fundamental laws of Theoretical
Mechanics.

Only one, therefore, the first, of the hypotheses so positively
announced, was capable of realization. The travellers--that is to say if
they still lived--might so combine and unite their own efforts with
those of the Lunar attraction as actually to succeed at last in reaching
the Moon's surface.

Now the travellers, those daring but cool-headed men who knew very well
what they were about, _did_ still live, they _had_ survived the
frightful concussion of the start, and it is to the faithful record of
their wonderful trip in the bullet-car, with all its singular and
dramatic details, that the present volume is devoted. The story may
destroy many illusions, prejudices and conjectures; but it will at least
give correct ideas of the strange incidents to which such an enterprise
is exposed, and it will certainly bring out in strong colors the effects
of Barbican's scientific conceptions, M'Nicholl's mechanical resources,
and Ardan's daring, eccentric, but brilliant and effective combinations.

Besides, it will show that J.T. Marston, their faithful friend and a man
every way worthy of the friendship of such men, was only losing his time
while mirroring the Moon in the speculum of the gigantic telescope on
that lofty peak of the mountains.




CHAPTER I.

FROM 10 P.M. TO 10 46' 40''.


The moment that the great clock belonging to the works at Stony Hill had
struck ten, Barbican, Ardan and M'Nicholl began to take their last
farewells of the numerous friends surrounding them. The two dogs
intended to accompany them had been already deposited in the Projectile.
The three travellers approached the mouth of the enormous cannon, seated
themselves in the flying car, and once more took leave for the last time
of the vast throng standing in silence around them. The windlass
creaked, the car started, and the three daring men disappeared in the
yawning gulf.

The trap-hole giving them ready access to the interior of the
Projectile, the car soon came back empty; the great windlass was
presently rolled away; the tackle and scaffolding were removed, and in a
short space of time the great mouth of the Columbiad was completely rid
of all obstructions.

M'Nicholl took upon himself to fasten the door of the trap on the inside
by means of a powerful combination of screws and bolts of his own
invention. He also covered up very carefully the glass lights with
strong iron plates of extreme solidity and tightly fitting joints.

Ardan's first care was to turn on the gas, which he found burning rather
low; but he lit no more than one burner, being desirous to economize as
much as possible their store of light and heat, which, as he well knew,
could not at the very utmost last them longer than a few weeks.

Under the cheerful blaze, the interior of the Projectile looked like a
comfortable little chamber, with its circular sofa, nicely padded walls,
and dome shaped ceiling.

All the articles that it contained, arms, instruments, utensils, etc.,
were solidly fastened to the projections of the wadding, so as to
sustain the least injury possible from the first terrible shock. In
fact, all precautions possible, humanly speaking, had been taken to
counteract this, the first, and possibly one of the very greatest
dangers to which the courageous adventurers would be exposed.

Ardan expressed himself to be quite pleased with the appearance of
things in general.

"It's a prison, to be sure," said he "but not one of your ordinary
prisons that always keep in the one spot. For my part, as long as I can
have the privilege of looking out of the window, I am willing to lease
it for a hundred years. Ah! Barbican, that brings out one of your stony
smiles. You think our lease may last longer than that! Our tenement may
become our coffin, eh? Be it so. I prefer it anyway to Mahomet's; it may
indeed float in the air, but it won't be motionless as a milestone!"

[Illustration: TURN ON THE GAS.]

Barbican, having made sure by personal inspection that everything was in
perfect order, consulted his chronometer, which he had carefully set a
short time before with Chief Engineer Murphy's, who had been charged to
fire off the Projectile.

"Friends," he said, "it is now twenty minutes past ten. At 10 46' 40'',
precisely, Murphy will send the electric current into the gun-cotton. We
have, therefore, twenty-six minutes more to remain on earth."

"Twenty-six minutes and twenty seconds," observed Captain M'Nicholl, who
always aimed at mathematical precision.

"Twenty-six minutes!" cried Ardan, gaily. "An age, a cycle, according to
the use you make of them. In twenty-six minutes how much can be done!
The weightiest questions of warfare, politics, morality, can be
discussed, even decided, in twenty-six minutes. Twenty-six minutes well
spent are infinitely more valuable than twenty-six lifetimes wasted! A
few seconds even, employed by a Pascal, or a Newton, or a Barbican, or
any other profoundly intellectual being

    Whose thoughts wander through eternity--"

"As mad as Marston! Every bit!" muttered the Captain, half audibly.

"What do you conclude from this rigmarole of yours?" interrupted
Barbican.

"I conclude that we have twenty-six good minutes still left--"

"Only twenty-four minutes, ten seconds," interrupted the Captain, watch
in hand.

"Well, twenty-four minutes, Captain," Ardan went on; "now even in
twenty-four minutes, I maintain--"

"Ardan," interrupted Barbican, "after a very little while we shall have
plenty of time for philosophical disputations. Just now let us think of
something far more pressing."

"More pressing! what do you mean? are we not fully prepared?"

"Yes, fully prepared, as far at least as we have been able to foresee.
But we may still, I think, possibly increase the number of precautions
to be taken against the terrible shock that we are so soon to
experience."

"What? Have you any doubts whatever of the effectiveness of your
brilliant and extremely original idea? Don't you think that the layers
of water, regularly disposed in easily-ruptured partitions beneath this
floor, will afford us sufficient protection by their elasticity?"

"I hope so, indeed, my dear friend, but I am by no means confident."

"He hopes! He is by no means confident! Listen to that, Mac! Pretty time
to tell us so! Let me out of here!"

"Too late!" observed the Captain quietly. "The trap-hole alone would
take ten or fifteen minutes to open."

"Oh then I suppose I must make the best of it," said Ardan, laughing.
"All aboard, gentlemen! The train starts in twenty minutes!"

"In nineteen minutes and eighteen seconds," said the Captain, who never
took his eye off the chronometer.

The three travellers looked at each other for a little while, during
which even Ardan appeared to become serious. After another careful
glance at the several objects lying around them, Barbican said, quietly:

"Everything is in its place, except ourselves. What we have now to do is
to decide on the position we must take in order to neutralize the shock
as much as possible. We must be particularly careful to guard against a
rush of blood to the head."

"Correct!" said the Captain.

"Suppose we stood on our heads, like the circus tumblers!" cried Ardan,
ready to suit the action to the word.

"Better than that," said Barbican; "we can lie on our side. Keep clearly
in mind, dear friends, that at the instant of departure it makes very
little difference to us whether we are inside the bullet or in front of
it. There is, no doubt, _some_ difference," he added, seeing the great
eyes made by his friends, "but it is exceedingly little."

"Thank heaven for the _some_!" interrupted Ardan, fervently.

"Don't you approve of my suggestion, Captain?" asked Barbican.

"Certainly," was the hasty reply. "That is to say, absolutely.
Seventeen minutes twenty-seven seconds!"

"Mac isn't a human being at all!" cried Ardan, admiringly. "He is a
repeating chronometer, horizontal escapement, London-made lever, capped,
jewelled,--"

His companions let him run on while they busied themselves in making
their last arrangements, with the greatest coolness and most systematic
method. In fact, I don't think of anything just now to compare them to
except a couple of old travellers who, having to pass the night in the
train, are trying to make themselves as comfortable as possible for
their long journey. In your profound astonishment, you may naturally ask
me of what strange material can the hearts of these Americans be made,
who can view without the slightest semblance of a flutter the approach
of the most appalling dangers? In your curiosity I fully participate,
but, I'm sorry to say, I can't gratify it. It is one of those things
that I could never find out.

Three mattresses, thick and well wadded, spread on the disc forming the
false bottom of the Projectile, were arranged in lines whose parallelism
was simply perfect. But Ardan would never think of occupying his until
the very last moment. Walking up and down, with the restless nervousness
of a wild beast in a cage, he kept up a continuous fire of talk; at one
moment with his friends, at another with the dogs, addressing the latter
by the euphonious and suggestive names of Diana and Satellite.

[Illustration: DIANA AND SATELLITE.]

"Ho, pets!" he would exclaim as he patted them gently, "you must not
forget the noble part you are to play up there. You must be models of
canine deportment. The eyes of the whole Selenitic world will be upon
you. You are the standard bearers of your race. From you they will
receive their first impression regarding its merits. Let it be a
favorable one. Compel those Selenites to acknowledge, in spite of
themselves, that the terrestrial race of canines is far superior to that
of the very best Moon dog among them!"

"Dogs in the Moon!" sneered M'Nicholl, "I like that!"

"Plenty of dogs!" cried Ardan, "and horses too, and cows, and sheep, and
no end of chickens!"

"A hundred dollars to one there isn't a single chicken within the whole
Lunar realm, not excluding even the invisible side!" cried the Captain,
in an authoritative tone, but never taking his eye off the chronometer.

"I take that bet, my son," coolly replied Ardan, shaking the Captain's
hand by way of ratifying the wager; "and this reminds me, by the way,
Mac, that you have lost three bets already, to the pretty little tune of
six thousand dollars."

"And paid them, too!" cried the captain, monotonously; "ten, thirty-six,
six!"

"Yes, and in a quarter of an hour you will have to pay nine thousand
dollars more; four thousand because the Columbiad will not burst, and
five thousand because the Projectile will rise more than six miles from
the Earth."

"I have the money ready," answered the Captain, touching his breeches
pocket. "When I lose I pay. Not sooner. Ten, thirty-eight, ten!"

"Captain, you're a man of method, if there ever was one. I think,
however, that you made a mistake in your wagers."

"How so?" asked the Captain listlessly, his eye still on the dial.

"Because, by Jove, if you win there will be no more of you left to take
the money than there will be of Barbican to pay it!"

"Friend Ardan," quietly observed Barbican, "my stakes are deposited in
the _Wall Street Bank_, of New York, with orders to pay them over to the
Captain's heirs, in case the Captain himself should fail to put in an
appearance at the proper time."

"Oh! you rhinoceroses, you pachyderms, you granite men!" cried Ardan,
gasping with surprise; "you machines with iron heads, and iron hearts! I
may admire you, but I'm blessed if I understand you!"

"Ten, forty-two, ten!" repeated M'Nicholl, as mechanically as if it was
the chronometer itself that spoke.

"Four minutes and a half more," said Barbican.

"Oh! four and a half little minutes!" went on Ardan. "Only think of it!
We are shut up in a bullet that lies in the chamber of a cannon nine
hundred feet long. Underneath this bullet is piled a charge of 400
thousand pounds of gun-cotton, equivalent to 1600 thousand pounds of
ordinary gunpowder! And at this very instant our friend Murphy,
chronometer in hand, eye on dial, finger on discharger, is counting the
last seconds and getting ready to launch us into the limitless regions
of planetary--"

"Ardan, dear friend," interrupted Barbican, in a grave tone, "a serious
moment is now at hand. Let us meet it with some interior recollection.
Give me your hands, my dear friends."

"Certainly," said Ardan, with tears in his voice, and already at the
other extreme of his apparent levity.

The three brave men united in one last, silent, but warm and impulsively
affectionate pressure.

"And now, great God, our Creator, protect us! In Thee we trust!" prayed
Barbican, the others joining him with folded hands and bowed heads.

"Ten, forty-six!" whispered the Captain, as he and Ardan quietly took
their places on the mattresses.

Only forty seconds more!

Barbican rapidly extinguishes the gas and lies down beside his
companions.

The deathlike silence now reigning in the Projectile is interrupted only
by the sharp ticking of the chronometer as it beats the seconds.

Suddenly, a dreadful shock is felt, and the Projectile, shot up by the
instantaneous development of 200,000 millions of cubic feet of gas, is
flying into space with inconceivable rapidity!




CHAPTER II.

THE FIRST HALF HOUR.


What had taken place within the Projectile? What effect had been
produced by the frightful concussion? Had Barbican's ingenuity been
attended with a fortunate result? Had the shock been sufficiently
deadened by the springs, the buffers, the water layers, and the
partitions so readily ruptured? Had their combined effect succeeded in
counteracting the tremendous violence of a velocity of 12,000 yards a
second, actually sufficient to carry them from London to New York in six
minutes? These, and a hundred other questions of a similar nature were
asked that night by the millions who had been watching the explosion
from the base of Stony Hill. Themselves they forgot altogether for the
moment; they forgot everything in their absorbing anxiety regarding the
fate of the daring travellers. Had one among them, our friend Marston,
for instance, been favored with a glimpse at the interior of the
projectile, what would he have seen?

Nothing at all at first, on account of the darkness; except that the
walls had solidly resisted the frightful shock. Not a crack, nor a bend,
nor a dent could be perceived; not even the slightest injury had the
admirably constructed piece of mechanical workmanship endured. It had
not yielded an inch to the enormous pressure, and, far from melting and
falling back to earth, as had been so seriously apprehended, in showers
of blazing aluminium, it was still as strong in every respect as it had
been on the very day that it left the Cold Spring Iron Works, glittering
like a silver dollar.

Of real damage there was actually none, and even the disorder into which
things had been thrown in the interior by the violent shock was
comparatively slight. A few small objects lying around loose had been
furiously hurled against the ceiling, but the others appeared not to
have suffered the slightest injury. The straps that fastened them up
were unfrayed, and the fixtures that held them down were uncracked.

The partitions beneath the disc having been ruptured, and the water
having escaped, the false floor had been dashed with tremendous violence
against the bottom of the Projectile, and on this disc at this moment
three human bodies could be seen lying perfectly still and motionless.

Were they three corpses? Had the Projectile suddenly become a great
metallic coffin bearing its ghastly contents through the air with the
rapidity of a lightning flash?

In a very few minutes after the shock, one of the bodies stirred a
little, the arms moved, the eyes opened, the head rose and tried to look
around; finally, with some difficulty, the body managed to get on its
knees. It was the Frenchman! He held his head tightly squeezed between
his hands for some time as if to keep it from splitting. Then he felt
himself rapidly all over, cleared his throat with a vigorous "hem!"
listened to the sound critically for an instant, and then said to
himself in a relieved tone, but in his native tongue:

"One man all right! Call the roll for the others!"

He tried to rise, but the effort was too great for his strength. He fell
back again, his brain swimming, his eyes bursting, his head splitting.
His state very much resembled that of a young man waking up in the
morning after his first tremendous "spree."

"Br--rr!" he muttered to himself, still talking French; "this reminds me
of one of my wild nights long ago in the _Quartier Latin_, only
decidedly more so!"

Lying quietly on his back for a while, he could soon feel that the
circulation of his blood, so suddenly and violently arrested by the
terrific shock, was gradually recovering its regular flow; his heart
grew more normal in its action; his head became clearer, and the pain
less distracting.

"Time to call that roll," he at last exclaimed in a voice with some
pretensions to firmness; "Barbican! MacNicholl!"

He listens anxiously for a reply. None comes. A snow-wrapt grave at
midnight is not more silent. In vain does he try to catch even the
faintest sound of breathing, though he listens intently enough to hear
the beating of their hearts; but he hears only his own.

"Call that roll again!" he mutters in a voice far less assured than
before; "Barbican! MacNicholl!"

The same fearful unearthly stillness.

"The thing is getting decidedly monotonous!" he exclaimed, still
speaking French. Then rapidly recovering his consciousness as the full
horror of the situation began to break on his mind, he went on muttering
audibly: "Have they really hopped the twig? Bah! Fudge! what has not
been able to knock the life out of one little Frenchman can't have
killed two Americans! They're all right! But first and foremost, let us
enlighten the situation!"

So saying, he contrived without much difficulty to get on his feet.
Balancing himself then for a moment, he began groping about for the gas.
But he stopped suddenly.

"Hold on a minute!" he cried; "before lighting this match, let us see if
the gas has been escaping. Setting fire to a mixture of air and hydrogen
would make a pretty how-do-you-do! Such an explosion would infallibly
burst the Projectile, which so far seems all right, though I'm blest if
I can tell whether we're moving or not."

He began sniffing and smelling to discover if possible the odor of
escaped gas. He could not detect the slightest sign of anything of the
kind. This gave him great courage. He knew of course that his senses
were not yet in good order, still he thought he might trust them so far
as to be certain that the gas had not escaped and that consequently all
the other receptacles were uninjured.

At the touch of the match, the gas burst into light and burned with a
steady flame. Ardan immediately bent anxiously over the prostrate bodies
of his friends. They lay on each other like inert masses, M'Nicholl
stretched across Barbican.

Ardan first lifted up the Captain, laid him on the sofa, opened his
clenched hands, rubbed them, and slapped the palms vigorously. Then he
went all over the body carefully, kneading it, rubbing it, and gently
patting it. In such intelligent efforts to restore suspended
circulation, he seemed perfectly at home, and after a few minutes his
patience was rewarded by seeing the Captain's pallid face gradually
recover its natural color, and by feeling his heart gradually beat with
a firm pulsation.

At last M'Nicholl opened his eyes, stared at Ardan for an instant,
pressed his hand, looked around searchingly and anxiously, and at last
whispered in a faint voice:

"How's Barbican?"

"Barbican is all right, Captain," answered Ardan quietly, but still
speaking French. "I'll attend to him in a jiffy. He had to wait for his
turn. I began with you because you were the top man. We'll see in a
minute what we can do for dear old Barby (_ce cher Barbican_)!"

In less than thirty seconds more, the Captain not only was able to sit
up himself, but he even insisted on helping Ardan to lift Barbican,
and deposit him gently on the sofa.

[Illustration: HELPED ARDAN TO LIFT BARBICAN.]

The poor President had evidently suffered more from the concussion than
either of his companions. As they took off his coat they were at first
terribly shocked at the sight of a great patch of blood staining his
shirt bosom, but they were inexpressibly relieved at finding that it
proceeded from a slight contusion of the shoulder, little more than skin
deep.

Every approved operation that Ardan had performed for the Captain, both
now repeated for Barbican, but for a long time with nothing like a
favorable result.

Ardan at first tried to encourage the Captain by whispers of a lively
and hopeful nature, but not yet understanding why M'Nicholl did not
deign to make a single reply, he grew reserved by degrees and at last
would not speak a single word. He worked at Barbican, however, just as
before.

M'Nicholl interrupted himself every moment to lay his ear on the breast
of the unconscious man. At first he had shaken his head quite
despondingly, but by degrees he found himself more and more encouraged
to persist.

"He breathes!" he whispered at last.

"Yes, he has been breathing for some time," replied Ardan, quietly,
still unconsciously speaking French. "A little more rubbing and pulling
and pounding will make him as spry as a young grasshopper."

They worked at him, in fact, so vigorously, intelligently and
perseveringly, that, after what they considered a long hour's labor,
they had the delight of seeing the pale face assume a healthy hue, the
inert limbs give signs of returning animation, and the breathing become
strong and regular.

At last, Barbican suddenly opened his eyes, started into an upright
position on the sofa, took his friends by the hands, and, in a voice
showing complete consciousness, demanded eagerly:

"Ardan, M'Nicholl, are we moving?"

His friends looked at each other, a little amused, but more perplexed.
In their anxiety regarding their own and their friend's recovery, they
had never thought of asking such a question. His words recalled them at
once to a full sense of their situation.

"Moving? Blessed if I can tell!" said Ardan, still speaking French.

"We may be lying fifty feet deep in a Florida marsh, for all I know,"
observed M'Nicholl.

"Or, likely as not, in the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico," suggested
Ardan, still in French.

"Suppose we find out," observed Barbican, jumping up to try, his voice
as clear and his step as firm as ever.

But trying is one thing, and finding out another. Having no means of
comparing themselves with external objects, they could not possibly tell
whether they were moving, or at an absolute stand-still. Though our
Earth is whirling us continually around the Sun at the tremendous speed
of 500 miles a minute, its inhabitants are totally unconscious of the
slightest motion. It was the same with our travellers. Through their own
personal consciousness they could tell absolutely nothing. Were they
shooting through space like a meteor? They could not tell. Had they
fallen back and buried themselves deep in the sandy soil of Florida, or,
still more likely, hundreds of fathoms deep beneath the waters of the
Gulf of Mexico? They could not form the slightest idea.

Listening evidently could do no good. The profound silence proved
nothing. The padded walls of the Projectile were too thick to admit any
sound whether of wind, water, or human beings. Barbican, however, was
soon struck forcibly by one circumstance. He felt himself to be very
uncomfortably warm, and his friend's faces looked very hot and flushed.
Hastily removing the cover that protected the thermometer, he closely
inspected it, and in an instant uttered a joyous exclamation.

"Hurrah!" he cried. "We're moving! There's no mistake about it. The
thermometer marks 113 degrees Fahrenheit. Such a stifling heat could not
come from the gas. It comes from the exterior walls of our projectile,
which atmospheric friction must have made almost red hot. But this heat
must soon diminish, because we are already far beyond the regions of the
atmosphere, so that instead of smothering we shall be shortly in danger
of freezing."

"What?" asked Ardan, much bewildered. "We are already far beyond the
limits of the terrestrial atmosphere! Why do you think so?"

M'Nicholl was still too much flustered to venture a word.

"If you want me to answer your question satisfactorily, my dear Ardan,"
replied Barbican, with a quiet smile, "you will have the kindness to put
your questions in English."

"What do you mean, Barbican!" asked Ardan, hardly believing his ears.

"Hurrah!" cried M'Nicholl, in the tone of a man who has suddenly made a
welcome but most unexpected discovery.

"I don't know exactly how it is with the Captain," continued Barbican,
with the utmost tranquillity, "but for my part the study of the
languages never was my strong point, and though I always admired the
French, and even understood it pretty well, I never could converse in it
without giving myself more trouble than I always find it convenient to
assume."

"You don't mean to say that I have been talking French to you all this
time!" cried Ardan, horror-stricken.

"The most elegant French I ever heard, backed by the purest Parisian
accent," replied Barbican, highly amused; "Don't you think so, Captain?"
he added, turning to M'Nicholl, whose countenance still showed the most
comical traces of bewilderment.

"Well, I swan to man!" cried the Captain, who always swore a little
when his feelings got beyond his control; "Ardan, the Boss has got the
rig on both of us this time, but rough as it is on you it is a darned
sight more so on me. Be hanged if I did not think you were talking
English the whole time, and I put the whole blame for not understanding
you on the disordered state of my brain!"

Ardan only stared, and scratched his head, but Barbican actually--no,
not _laughed_, that serene nature could not _laugh_. His cast-iron
features puckered into a smile of the richest drollery, and his eyes
twinkled with the wickedest fun; but no undignified giggle escaped the
portal of those majestic lips.

"It _sounds_ like French, I'd say to myself," continued the Captain,
"but I _know_ it's English, and by and by, when this whirring goes out
of my head, I shall easily understand it."

Ardan now looked as if he was beginning to see the joke.

"The most puzzling part of the thing to me," went on M'Nicholl, giving
his experience with the utmost gravity, "was why English sounded so like
_French_. If it was simple incomprehensible gibberish, I could readily
blame the state of my ears for it. But the idea that my bothered ears
could turn a mere confused, muzzled, buzzing reverberation into a sweet,
harmonious, articulate, though unintelligible, human language, made me
sure that I was fast becoming crazy, if I was not so already."

"Ha! ha! ha!" roared Ardan, laughing till the tears came. "Now I
understand why the poor Captain made me no reply all the time, and
looked at me with such a hapless woe-begone expression of countenance.
The fact is, Barbican, that shock was too much both for M'Nicholl and
myself. You are the only man among us whose head is fire-proof,
blast-proof, and powder-proof. I really believe a burglar would have
greater difficulty in blowing your head-piece open than in bursting one
of those famous American safes your papers make such a fuss about. A
wonderful head, the Boss's, isn't it M'Nicholl?"

"Yes," said the Captain, as slowly as if every word were a gem of the
profoundest thought, "the Boss has a fearful and a wonderful head!"

"But now to business!" cried the versatile Ardan, "Why do you think,
Barbican, that we are at present beyond the limits of the terrestrial
atmosphere?"

"For a very simple reason," said Barbican, pointing to the chronometer;
"it is now more than seven minutes after 11. We must, therefore, have
been in motion more than twenty minutes. Consequently, unless our
initial velocity has been very much diminished by the friction, we must
have long before this completely cleared the fifty miles of atmosphere
enveloping the earth."

"Correct," said the Captain, cool as a cucumber, because once more in
complete possession of all his senses; "but how much do you think the
initial velocity to have been diminished by the friction?"

"By a third, according to my calculations," replied Barbican, "which I
think are right. Supposing our initial velocity, therefore, to have been
12,000 yards per second, by the time we quitted the atmosphere it must
have been reduced to 8,000 yards per second. At that rate, we must have
gone by this time--"

"Then, Mac, my boy, you've lost your two bets!" interrupted Ardan. "The
Columbiad has not burst, four thousand dollars; the Projectile has risen
at least six miles, five thousand dollars; come, Captain, bleed!"

"Let me first be sure we're right," said the Captain, quietly. "I don't
deny, you see, that friend Barbican's arguments are quite right, and,
therefore, that I have lost my nine thousand dollars. But there is
another view of the case possible, which might annul the bet."

"What other view?" asked Barbican, quickly.

"Suppose," said the Captain, very drily, "that the powder had not
caught, and that we were still lying quietly at the bottom of the
Columbiad!"

"By Jove!" laughed Ardan, "there's an idea truly worthy of my own
nondescript brain! We must surely have changed heads during that
concussion! No matter, there is some sense left in us yet. Come now,
Captain, consider a little, if you can. Weren't we both half-killed by
the shock? Didn't I rescue you from certain death with these two hands?
Don't you see Barbican's shoulder still bleeding by the violence of the
shock?"

"Correct, friend Michael, correct in every particular," replied the
Captain, "But one little question."

"Out with it!"

"Friend Michael, you say we're moving?"

"Yes."

"In consequence of the explosion?"

"Certainly!"

"Which must have been attended with a tremendous report?"

"Of course!"

"Did you hear that report, friend Michael?"

"N--o," replied Ardan, a little disconcerted at the question. "Well, no;
I can't say that I did hear any report."

"Did you, friend Barbican?"

"No," replied Barbican, promptly. "I heard no report whatever."

His answer was ready, but his look was quite as disconcerted as Ardan's.

"Well, friend Barbican and friend Michael," said the Captain, very drily
as he leered wickedly at both, "put that and that together and tell me
what you make of it."

"It's a fact!" exclaimed Barbican, puzzled, but not bewildered. "Why did
we not hear that report?"

"Too hard for me," said Ardan. "Give it up!"

The three friends gazed at each other for a while with countenances
expressive of much perplexity. Barbican appeared to be the least
self-possessed of the party. It was a complete turning of the tables
from the state of things a few moments ago. The problem was certainly
simple enough, but for that very reason the more inexplicable. If they
were moving the explosion must have taken place; but if the explosion
had taken place, why had they not heard the report?

Barbican's decision soon put an end to speculation.

"Conjecture being useless," said he, "let us have recourse to facts.
First, let us see where we are. Drop the deadlights!"

This operation, simple enough in itself and being immediately undertaken
by the whole three, was easily accomplished. The screws fastening the
bolts by which the external plates of the deadlights were solidly
pinned, readily yielded to the pressure of a powerful wrench. The bolts
were then driven outwards, and the holes which had contained them were
immediately filled with solid plugs of India rubber. The bolts once
driven out, the external plates dropped by their own weight, turning on
a hinge, like portholes, and the strong plate-glass forming the light
immediately showed itself. A second light exactly similar, could be
cleared away on the opposite side of the Projectile; a third, on the
summit of the dome, and a fourth, in the centre of the bottom. The
travellers could thus take observations in four different directions,
having an opportunity of gazing at the firmament through the side
lights, and at the Earth and the Moon through the lower and the upper
lights of the Projectile.

Ardan and the Captain had commenced examining the floor, previous to
operating on the bottom light. But Barbican was the first to get through
his work at one of the side lights, and M'Nicholl and Ardan soon heard
him shouting:

"No, my friends!" he exclaimed, in tones of decided emotion; "we have
_not_ fallen back to Earth; nor are we lying in the bottom of the Gulf
of Mexico. No! We are driving through space! Look at the stars
glittering all around! Brighter, but smaller than we have ever seen them
before! We have left the Earth and the Earth's atmosphere far behind
us!"

"Hurrah! Hurrah!" cried M'Nicholl and Ardan, feeling as if electric
shocks were coursing through them, though they could see nothing,
looking down from the side light, but the blackest and profoundest
obscurity.

Barbican soon convinced them that this pitchy blackness proved that they
were not, and could not be, reposing on the surface of the Earth, where
at that moment, everything was illuminated by the bright moonlight; also
that they had passed the different layers of the atmosphere, where the
diffused and refracted rays would be also sure to reveal themselves
through the lights of the Projectile. They were, therefore, certainly
moving. No doubt was longer possible.

"It's a fact!" observed the Captain, now quite convinced. "Then I've
lost!"

"Let me congratulate you!" cried Ardan, shaking his hand.

"Here is your nine thousand dollars, friend Barbican," said the Captain,
taking a roll of greenbacks of high denomination out of his
porte-monnaie.

"You want a receipt, don't you, Captain?" asked Barbican, counting the
money.

"Yes, I should prefer one, if it is not too much trouble," answered
M'Nicholl; "it saves dispute."

Coolly and mechanically, as if seated at his desk, in his office,
Barbican opened his memorandum book, wrote a receipt on a blank page,
dated, signed and sealed it, and then handed it to the Captain, who put
it away carefully among the other papers of his portfolio.

Ardan, taking off his hat, made a profound bow to both of his
companions, without saying a word. Such formality, under such
extraordinary circumstances, actually paralysed his tongue for the
moment. No wonder that he could not understand those Americans. Even
Indians would have surprised him by an exhibition of such stoicism.
After indulging in silent wonder for a minute or two, he joined his
companions who were now busy looking out at the starry sky.

"Where is the Moon?" he asked. "How is it that we cannot see her?"

"The fact of our not seeing her," answered Barbican, "gives me very
great satisfaction in one respect; it shows that our Projectile was shot
so rapidly out of the Columbiad that it had not time to be impressed
with the slightest revolving motion--for us a most fortunate matter. As
for the rest--see, there is _Cassiopeia_, a little to the left is
_Andromeda_, further down is the great square of _Pegasus_, and to the
southwest _Fomalhaut_ can be easily seen swallowing the _Cascade_. All
this shows we are looking west and consequently cannot see the Moon,
which is approaching the zenith from the east. Open the other light--But
hold on! Look here! What can this be?"

The three travellers, looking westwardly in the direction of _Alpherat_,
saw a brilliant object rapidly approaching them. At a distance, it
looked like a dusky moon, but the side turned towards the Earth blazed
with a bright light, which every moment became more intense. It came
towards them with prodigious velocity and, what was worse, its path lay
so directly in the course of the Projectile that a collision seemed
inevitable. As it moved onward, from west to east, they could easily see
that it rotated on its axis, like all heavenly bodies; in fact, it
somewhat resembled a Moon on a small scale, describing its regular orbit
around the Earth.

"_Mille tonerres!_" cried Ardan, greatly excited; "what is that? Can it
be another projectile?" M'Nicholl, wiping his spectacles, looked again,
but made no reply. Barbican looked puzzled and uneasy. A collision was
quite possible, and the results, even if not frightful in the highest
degree, must be extremely deplorable. The Projectile, if not absolutely
dashed to pieces, would be diverted from its own course and dragged
along in a new one in obedience to the irresistible attraction of this
furious asteroid.

Barbican fully realized that either alternative involved the complete
failure of their enterprise. He kept perfectly still, but, never losing
his presence of mind, he curiously looked on the approaching object with
a gladiatorial eye, as if seeking to detect some unguarded point in his
terrible adversary. The Captain was equally silent; he looked like a man
who had fully made up his mind to regard every possible contingency with
the most stoical indifference. But Ardan's tongue, more fluent than
ever, rattled away incessantly.

"Look! Look!" he exclaimed, in tones so perfectly expressive of his
rapidly alternating feelings as to render the medium of words totally
unnecessary. "How rapidly the cursed thing is nearing us! Plague take
your ugly phiz, the more I know you, the less I like you! Every second
she doubles in size! Come, Madame Projectile! Stir your stumps a little
livelier, old lady! He's making for you as straight as an arrow! We're
going right in his way, or he's coming in ours, I can't say which. It's
taking a mean advantage of us either way. As for ourselves--what can
_we_ do! Before such a monster as that we are as helpless as three men
in a little skiff shooting down the rapids to the brink of Niagara! Now
for it!"

Nearer and nearer it came, but without noise, without sparks, without a
trail, though its lower part was brighter than ever. Its path lying
little above them, the nearer it came the more the collision seemed
inevitable. Imagine yourself caught on a narrow railroad bridge at
midnight with an express train approaching at full speed, its reflector
already dazzling you with its light, the roar of the cars rattling in
your ears, and you may conceive the feelings of the travellers. At last
it was so near that the travellers started back in affright, with eyes
shut, hair on end, and fully believing their last hour had come. Even
then Ardan had his _mot_.

"We can neither switch off, down brakes, nor clap on more steam! Hard
luck!"

In an instant all was over. The velocity of the Projectile was
fortunately great enough to carry it barely above the dangerous point;
and in a flash the terrible bolide disappeared rapidly several hundred
yards beneath the affrighted travellers.

"Good bye! And may you never come back!" cried Ardan, hardly able to
breathe. "It's perfectly outrageous! Not room enough in infinite space
to let an unpretending bullet like ours move about a little without
incurring the risk of being run over by such a monster as that! What is
it anyhow? Do you know, Barbican?"

"I do," was the reply.

"Of course, you do! What is it that he don't know? Eh, Captain?"

"It is a simple bolide, but one of such enormous dimensions that the
Earth's attraction has made it a satellite."

"What!" cried Ardan, "another satellite besides the Moon? I hope there
are no more of them!"

"They are pretty numerous," replied Barbican; "but they are so small and
they move with such enormous velocity that they are very seldom seen.
Petit, the Director of the Observatory of Toulouse, who these last years
has devoted much time and care to the observation of bolides, has
calculated that the very one we have just encountered moves with such
astonishing swiftness that it accomplishes its revolution around the
Earth in about 3 hours and 20 minutes!"

"Whew!" whistled Ardan, "where should we be now if it had struck us!"

"You don't mean to say, Barbican," observed M'Nicholl, "that Petit has
seen this very one?"

"So it appears," replied Barbican.

"And do all astronomers admit its existence?" asked the Captain.

"Well, some of them have their doubts," replied Barbican--

"If the unbelievers had been here a minute or two ago," interrupted
Ardan, "they would never express a doubt again."

"If Petit's calculation is right," continued Barbican, "I can even form
a very good idea as to our distance from the Earth."

"It seems to me Barbican can do what he pleases here or elsewhere,"
observed Ardan to the Captain.

"Let us see, Barbican," asked M'Nicholl; "where has Petit's calculation
placed us?"

"The bolide's distance being known," replied Barbican, "at the moment we
met it we were a little more than 5 thousand miles from the Earth's
surface."

"Five thousand miles already!" cried Ardan, "why we have only just
started!"

"Let us see about that," quietly observed the Captain, looking at his
chronometer, and calculating with his pencil. "It is now 10 minutes past
eleven; we have therefore been 23 minutes on the road. Supposing our
initial velocity of 10,000 yards or nearly seven miles a second, to have
been kept up, we should by this time be about 9,000 miles from the
Earth; but by allowing for friction and gravity, we can hardly be more
than 5,500 miles. Yes, friend Barbican, Petit does not seem to be very
wrong in his calculations."

But Barbican hardly heard the observation. He had not yet answered the
puzzling question that had already presented itself to them for
solution; and until he had done so he could not attend to anything else.

"That's all very well and good, Captain," he replied in an absorbed
manner, "but we have not yet been able to account for a very strange
phenomenon. Why didn't we hear the report?"

No one replying, the conversation came to a stand-still, and Barbican,
still absorbed in his reflections, began clearing the second light of
its external shutter. In a few minutes the plate dropped, and the Moon
beams, flowing in, filled the interior of the Projectile with her
brilliant light. The Captain immediately put out the gas, from motives
of economy as well as because its glare somewhat interfered with the
observation of the interplanetary regions.

The Lunar disc struck the travellers as glittering with a splendor and
purity of light that they had never witnessed before. The beams, no
longer strained through the misty atmosphere of the Earth, streamed
copiously in through the glass and coated the interior walls of the
Projectile with a brilliant silvery plating. The intense blackness of
the sky enhanced the dazzling radiance of the Moon. Even the stars
blazed with a new and unequalled splendor, and, in the absence of a
refracting atmosphere, they flamed as bright in the close proximity of
the Moon as in any other part of the sky.

You can easily conceive the interest with which these bold travellers
gazed on the Starry Queen, the final object of their daring journey. She
was now insensibly approaching the zenith, the mathematical point which
she was to reach four days later. They presented their telescopes, but
her mountains, plains, craters and general characteristics hardly came
out a particle more sharply than if they had been viewed from the Earth.
Still, her light, unobstructed by air or vapor, shimmered with a lustre
actually transplendent. Her disc shone like a mirror of polished
platins. The travellers remained for some time absorbed in the silent
contemplation of the glorious scene.

"How they're gazing at her this very moment from Stony Hill!" said the
Captain at last to break the silence.

"By Jove!" cried Ardan; "It's true! Captain you're right. We were near
forgetting our dear old Mother, the Earth. What ungrateful children! Let
me feast my eyes once more on the blessed old creature!"

Barbican, to satisfy his companion's desire, immediately commenced to
clear away the disc which covered the floor of the Projectile and
prevented them from getting at the lower light. This disc, though it had
been dashed to the bottom of the Projectile with great violence, was
still as strong as ever, and, being made in compartments fastened by
screws, to dismount it was no easy matter. Barbican, however, with the
help of the others, soon had it all taken apart, and put away the pieces
carefully, to serve again in case of need. A round hole about a foot and
a half in diameter appeared, bored through the floor of the Projectile.
It was closed by a circular pane of plate-glass, which was about six
inches thick, fastened by a ring of copper. Below, on the outside, the
glass was protected by an aluminium plate, kept in its place by strong
bolts and nuts. The latter being unscrewed, the bolts slipped out by
their own weight, the shutter fell, and a new communication was
established between the interior and the exterior.

Ardan knelt down, applied his eye to the light, and tried to look out.
At first everything was quite dark and gloomy.

"I see no Earth!" he exclaimed at last.

"Don't you see a fine ribbon of light?" asked Barbican, "right beneath
us? A thin, pale, silvery crescent?"

"Of course I do. Can that be the Earth?"

"_Terra Mater_ herself, friend Ardan. That fine fillet of light, now
hardly visible on her eastern border, will disappear altogether as soon
as the Moon is full. Then, lying as she will be between the Sun and the
Moon, her illuminated face will be turned away from us altogether, and
for several days she will be involved in impenetrable darkness."

"And that's the Earth!" repeated Ardan, hardly able to believe his eyes,
as he continued to gaze on the slight thread of silvery white light,
somewhat resembling the appearance of the "Young May Moon" a few hours
after sunset.

Barbican's explanation was quite correct. The Earth, in reference to the
Moon or the Projectile, was in her last phase, or octant as it is
called, and showed a sharp-horned, attenuated, but brilliant crescent
strongly relieved by the black background of the sky. Its light,
rendered a little bluish by the density of the atmospheric envelopes,
was not quite as brilliant as the Moon's. But the Earth's crescent,
compared to the Lunar, was of dimensions much greater, being fully 4
times larger. You would have called it a vast, beautiful, but very thin
bow extending over the sky. A few points, brighter than the rest,
particularly in its concave part, revealed the presence of lofty
mountains, probably the Himalayahs. But they disappeared every now and
then under thick vapory spots, which are never seen on the Lunar disc.
They were the thin concentric cloud rings that surround the terrestrial
sphere.

However, the travellers' eyes were soon able to trace the rest of the
Earth's surface not only with facility, but even to follow its outline
with absolute delight. This was in consequence of two different
phenomena, one of which they could easily account for; but the other
they could not explain without Barbican's assistance. No wonder. Never
before had mortal eye beheld such a sight. Let us take each in its turn.

We all know that the ashy light by means of which we perceive what is
called the _Old Moon in the Young Moon's arms_ is due to the
Earth-shine, or the reflection of the solar rays from the Earth to the
Moon. By a phenomenon exactly identical, the travellers could now see
that portion of the Earth's surface which was unillumined by the Sun;
only, as, in consequence of the different areas of the respective
surfaces, the _Earthlight_ is thirteen times more intense than the
_Moonlight_, the dark portion of the Earth's disc appeared considerably
more adumbrated than the _Old Moon_.

But the other phenomenon had burst on them so suddenly that they
uttered a cry loud enough to wake up Barbican from his problem. They had
discovered a true starry ring! Around the Earth's outline, a ring, of
internally well defined thickness, but somewhat hazy on the outside,
could easily be traced by its surpassing brilliancy. Neither the
_Pleiades_, the _Northern Crown_, the _Magellanic Clouds_ nor the great
nebulas of _Orion_, or of _Argo_, no sparkling cluster, no corona, no
group of glittering star-dust that the travellers had ever gazed at,
presented such attractions as the diamond ring they now saw encompassing
the Earth, just as the brass meridian encompasses a terrestrial globe.
The resplendency of its light enchanted them, its pure softness
delighted them, its perfect regularity astonished them. What was it?
they asked Barbican. In a few words he explained it. The beautiful
luminous ring was simply an optical illusion, produced by the refraction
of the terrestrial atmosphere. All the stars in the neighborhood of the
Earth, and many actually behind it, had their rays refracted, diffused,
radiated, and finally converged to a focus by the atmosphere, as if by a
double convex lens of gigantic power.

Whilst the travellers were profoundly absorbed in the contemplation of
this wondrous sight, a sparkling shower of shooting stars suddenly
flashed over the Earth's dark surface, making it for a moment as bright
as the external ring. Hundreds of bolides, catching fire from contact
with the atmosphere, streaked the darkness with their luminous trails,
overspreading it occasionally with sheets of electric flame. The Earth
was just then in her perihelion, and we all know that the months of
November and December are so highly favorable to the appearance of these
meteoric showers that at the famous display of November, 1866,
astronomers counted as many as 8,000 between midnight and four o'clock.

Barbican explained the whole matter in a few words. The Earth, when
nearest to the sun, occasionally plunges into a group of countless
meteors travelling like comets, in eccentric orbits around the grand
centre of our solar system. The atmosphere strikes the rapidly moving
bodies with such violence as to set them on fire and render them visible
to us in beautiful star showers. But to this simple explanation of the
famous November meteors Ardan would not listen. He preferred believing
that Mother Earth, feeling that her three daring children were still
looking at her, though five thousand miles away, shot off her best
rocket-signals to show that she still thought of them and would never
let them out of her watchful eye.

For hours they continued to gaze with indescribable interest on the
faintly luminous mass so easily distinguishable among the other heavenly
bodies. Jupiter blazed on their right, Mars flashed his ruddy light on
their left, Saturn with his rings looked like a round white spot on a
black wall; even Venus they could see almost directly under them, easily
recognizing her by her soft, sweetly scintillant light. But no planet or
constellation possessed any attraction for the travellers, as long as
their eyes could trace that shadowy, crescent-edged, diamond-girdled,
meteor-furrowed spheroid, the theatre of their existence, the home of so
many undying desires, the mysterious cradle of their race!

Meantime the Projectile cleaved its way upwards, rapidly, unswervingly,
though with a gradually retarding velocity. As the Earth sensibly grew
darker, and the travellers' eyes grew dimmer, an irresistible somnolency
slowly stole over their weary frames. The extraordinary excitement they
had gone through during the last four or five hours, was naturally
followed by a profound reaction.

"Captain, you're nodding," said Ardan at last, after a longer silence
than usual; "the fact is, Barbican is the only wake man of the party,
because he is puzzling over his problem. _Dum vivimus vivamus_! As we
are asleep let us be asleep!"

So saying he threw himself on the mattress, and his companions
immediately followed the example.

They had been lying hardly a quarter of an hour, when Barbican started
up with a cry so loud and sudden as instantly to awaken his companions.

The bright moonlight showed them the President sitting up in his bed,
his eye blazing, his arms waving, as he shouted in a tone reminding them
of the day they had found him in St. Helena wood.

"_Eureka!_ I've got it! I know it!"

"What have you got?" cried Ardan, bouncing up and seizing him by the
right hand.

"What do you know?" cried the Captain, stretching over and seizing him
by the left.

"The reason why we did not hear the report!"

"Well, why did not we hear it!" asked both rapidly in the same breath.

"Because we were shot up 30 times faster than sound can travel!"




CHAPTER III.

THEY MAKE THEMSELVES AT HOME AND FEEL QUITE COMFORTABLE.


This curious explanation given, and its soundness immediately
recognized, the three friends were soon fast wrapped in the arms of
Morpheus. Where in fact could they have found a spot more favorable for
undisturbed repose? On land, where the dwellings, whether in populous
city or lonely country, continually experience every shock that thrills
the Earth's crust? At sea, where between waves or winds or paddles or
screws or machinery, everything is tremor, quiver or jar? In the air,
where the balloon is incessantly twirling, oscillating, on account of
the ever varying strata of different densities, and even occasionally
threatening to spill you out? The Projectile alone, floating grandly
through the absolute void, in the midst of the profoundest silence,
could offer to its inmates the possibility of enjoying slumber the most
complete, repose the most profound.

There is no telling how long our three daring travellers would have
continued to enjoy their sleep, if it had not been suddenly terminated
by an unexpected noise about seven o'clock in the morning of December
2nd, eight hours after their departure.

This noise was most decidedly of barking.

"The dogs! It's the dogs!" cried Ardan, springing up at a bound.

"They must be hungry!" observed the Captain.

"We have forgotten the poor creatures!" cried Barbican.

"Where can they have gone to?" asked Ardan, looking for them in all
directions.

At last they found one of them hiding under the sofa. Thunderstruck and
perfectly bewildered by the terrible shock, the poor animal had kept
close in its hiding place, never daring to utter a sound, until at last
the pangs of hunger had proved too strong even for its fright.

They readily recognized the amiable Diana, but they could not allure the
shivering, whining animal from her retreat without a good deal of
coaxing. Ardan talked to her in his most honeyed and seductive accents,
while trying to pull her out by the neck.

"Come out to your friends, charming Diana," he went on, "come out, my
beauty, destined for a lofty niche in the temple of canine glory! Come
out, worthy scion of a race deemed worthy by the Egyptians to be a
companion of the great god, Anubis, by the Christians, to be a friend of
the good Saint Roch! Come out and partake of a glory before which the
stars of Montargis and of St. Bernard shall henceforward pale their
ineffectual fire! Come out, my lady, and let me think o'er the countless
multiplication of thy species, so that, while sailing through the
interplanetary spaces, we may indulge in endless flights of fancy on
the number and variety of thy descendants who will ere long render the
Selenitic atmosphere vocal with canine ululation!"

[Illustration: MORE HUNGRY THAN EITHER.]

Diana, whether flattered or not, allowed herself to be dragged out,
still uttering short, plaintive whines. A hasty examination satisfying
her friends that she was more frightened than hurt and more hungry than
either, they continued their search for her companion.

"Satellite! Satellite! Step this way, sir!" cried Ardan. But no
Satellite appeared and, what was worse, not the slightest sound indicated
his presence. At last he was discovered on a ledge in the upper portion
of the Projectile, whither he had been shot by the terrible concussion.
Less fortunate than his female companion, the poor fellow had received a
frightful shock and his life was evidently in great danger.

"The acclimatization project looks shaky!" cried Ardan, handing the
animal very carefully and tenderly to the others. Poor Satellite's head
had been crushed against the roof, but, though recovery seemed hopeless,
they laid the body on a soft cushion, and soon had the satisfaction of
hearing it give vent to a slight sigh.

"Good!" said Ardan, "while there's life there's hope. You must not die
yet, old boy. We shall nurse you. We know our duty and shall not shirk
the responsibility. I should rather lose the right arm off my body than
be the cause of your death, poor Satellite! Try a little water?"

The suffering creature swallowed the cool draught with evident avidity,
then sunk into a deep slumber.

The friends, sitting around and having nothing more to do, looked out of
the window and began once more to watch the Earth and the Moon with
great attention. The glittering crescent of the Earth was evidently
narrower than it had been the preceding evening, but its volume was
still enormous when compared to the Lunar crescent, which was now
rapidly assuming the proportions of a perfect circle.

"By Jove," suddenly exclaimed Ardan, "why didn't we start at the moment
of Full Earth?--that is when our globe and the Sun were in opposition?"

"Why _should_ we!" growled M'Nicholl.

"Because in that case we should be now looking at the great continents
and the great seas in a new light--the former glittering under the solar
rays, the latter darker and somewhat shaded, as we see them on certain
maps. How I should like to get a glimpse at those poles of the Earth, on
which the eye of man has never yet lighted!"

"True," replied Barbican, "but if the Earth had been Full, the Moon
would have been New, that is to say, invisible to us on account of solar
irradiation. Of the two it is much preferable to be able to keep the
point of arrival in view rather than the point of departure."

"You're right, Barbican," observed the Captain; "besides, once we're in
the Moon, the long Lunar night will give us plenty of time to gaze our
full at yonder great celestial body, our former home, and still
swarming with our fellow beings."

"Our fellow beings no longer, dear boy!" cried Ardan. "We inhabit a new
world peopled by ourselves alone, the Projectile! Ardan is Barbican's
fellow being, and Barbican M'Nicholl's. Beyond us, outside us, humanity
ends, and we are now the only inhabitants of this microcosm, and so we
shall continue till the moment when we become Selenites pure and
simple."

"Which shall be in about eighty-eight hours from now," replied the
Captain.

"Which is as much as to say--?" asked Ardan.

"That it is half past eight," replied M'Nicholl.

"My regular hour for breakfast," exclaimed Ardan, "and I don't see the
shadow of a reason for changing it now."

The proposition was most acceptable, especially to the Captain, who
frequently boasted that, whether on land or water, on mountain summits
or in the depths of mines, he had never missed a meal in all his life.
In escaping from the Earth, our travellers felt that they had by no
means escaped from the laws of humanity, and their stomachs now called
on them lustily to fill the aching void. Ardan, as a Frenchman, claimed
the post of chief cook, an important office, but his companions yielded
it with alacrity. The gas furnished the requisite heat, and the
provision chest supplied the materials for their first repast. They
commenced with three plates of excellent soup, extracted from _Liebig's_
precious tablets, prepared from the best beef that ever roamed over the
Pampas.

To this succeeded several tenderloin beefsteaks, which, though reduced
to a small bulk by the hydraulic engines of the _American Dessicating
Company_, were pronounced to be fully as tender, juicy and savory as if
they had just left the gridiron of a London Club House. Ardan even swore
that they were "bleeding," and the others were too busy to contradict
him.

Preserved vegetables of various kinds, "fresher than nature," according
to Ardan, gave an agreeable variety to the entertainment, and these were
followed by several cups of magnificent tea, unanimously allowed to be
the best they had ever tasted. It was an odoriferous young hyson
gathered that very year, and presented to the Emperor of Russia by the
famous rebel chief Yakub Kushbegi, and of which Alexander had expressed
himself as very happy in being able to send a few boxes to his friend,
the distinguished President of the Baltimore Gun Club. To crown the
meal, Ardan unearthed an exquisite bottle of _Chambertin_, and, in
glasses sparkling with the richest juice of the _Cote d'or,_ the
travellers drank to the speedy union of the Earth and her satellite.

And, as if his work among the generous vineyards of Burgundy had not
been enough to show his interest in the matter, even the Sun wished to
join the party. Precisely at this moment, the Projectile beginning to
leave the conical shadow cast by the Earth, the rays of the glorious
King of Day struck its lower surface, not obliquely, but
perpendicularly, on account of the slight obliquity of the Moon's orbit
with that of the Earth.

[Illustration: TO THE UNION OF THE EARTH AND HER SATELLITE.]

"The Sun," cried Ardan.

"Of course," said Barbican, looking at his watch, "he's exactly up to
time."

"How is it that we see him only through the bottom light of our
Projectile?" asked Ardan.

"A moment's reflection must tell you," replied Barbican, "that when we
started last night, the Sun was almost directly below us; therefore, as
we continue to move in a straight line, he must still be in our rear."

"That's clear enough," said the Captain, "but another consideration, I'm
free to say, rather perplexes me. Since our Earth lies between us and
the Sun, why don't we see the sunlight forming a great ring around the
globe, in other words, instead of the full Sun that we plainly see there
below, why do we not witness an annular eclipse?"

"Your cool, clear head has not yet quite recovered from the shock, my
dear Captain;" replied Barbican, with a smile. "For two reasons we can't
see the ring eclipse: on account of the angle the Moon's orbit makes
with the Earth, the three bodies are not at present in a direct line;
we, therefore, see the Sun a little to the west of the earth; secondly,
even if they were exactly in a straight line, we should still be far
from the point whence an annular eclipse would be visible."

"That's true," said Ardan; "the cone of the Earth's shadow must extend
far beyond the Moon."

"Nearly four times as far," said Barbican; "still, as the Moon's orbit
and the Earth's do not lie in exactly the same plane, a Lunar eclipse
can occur only when the nodes coincide with the period of the Full Moon,
which is generally twice, never more than three times in a year. If we
had started about four days before the occurrence of a Lunar eclipse, we
should travel all the time in the dark. This would have been obnoxious
for many reasons."

"One, for instance?"

"An evident one is that, though at the present moment we are moving
through a vacuum, our Projectile, steeped in the solar rays, revels in
their light and heat. Hence great saving in gas, an important point in
our household economy."

In effect, the solar rays, tempered by no genial medium like our
atmosphere, soon began to glare and glow with such intensity, that the
Projectile under their influence, felt like suddenly passing from winter
to summer. Between the Moon overhead and the Sun beneath it was actually
inundated with fiery rays.

"One feels good here," cried the Captain, rubbing his hands.

"A little too good," cried Ardan. "It's already like a hot-house. With a
little garden clay, I could raise you a splendid crop of peas in
twenty-four hours. I hope in heaven the walls of our Projectile won't
melt like wax!"

"Don't be alarmed, dear friend," observed Barbican, quietly. "The
Projectile has seen the worst as far as heat is concerned; when tearing
through the atmosphere, she endured a temperature with which what she is
liable to at present stands no comparison. In fact, I should not be
astonished if, in the eyes of our friends at Stony Hill, it had
resembled for a moment or two a red-hot meteor."

"Poor Marston must have looked on us as roasted alive!" observed Ardan.

"What could have saved us I'm sure I can't tell," replied Barbican. "I
must acknowledge that against such a danger, I had made no provision
whatever."

"I knew all about it," said the Captain, "and on the strength of it, I
had laid my fifth wager."

"Probably," laughed Ardan, "there was not time enough to get grilled in:
I have heard of men who dipped their fingers into molten iron with
impunity."

Whilst Ardan and the Captain were arguing the point, Barbican began
busying himself in making everything as comfortable as if, instead of a
four days' journey, one of four years was contemplated. The reader, no
doubt, remembers that the floor of the Projectile contained about 50
square feet; that the chamber was nine feet high; that space was
economized as much as possible, nothing but the most absolute
necessities being admitted, of which each was kept strictly in its own
place; therefore, the travellers had room enough to move around in with
a certain liberty. The thick glass window in the floor was quite as
solid as any other part of it; but the Sun, streaming in from below,
lit up the Projectile strangely, producing some very singular and
startling effects of light appearing to come in by the wrong way.

The first thing now to be done was to see after the water cask and the
provision chest. They were not injured in the slightest respect, thanks
to the means taken to counteract the shock. The provisions were in good
condition, and abundant enough to supply the travellers for a whole
year--Barbican having taken care to be on the safe side, in case the
Projectile might land in a deserted region of the Moon. As for the water
and the other liquors, the travellers had enough only for two months.
Relying on the latest observations of astronomers, they had convinced
themselves that the Moon's atmosphere, being heavy, dense and thick in
the deep valleys, springs and streams of water could hardly fail to show
themselves there. During the journey, therefore, and for the first year
of their installation on the Lunar continent, the daring travellers
would be pretty safe from all danger of hunger or thirst.

The air supply proved also to be quite satisfactory. The _Reiset_ and
_Regnault_ apparatus for producing oxygen contained a supply of chlorate
of potash sufficient for two months. As the productive material had to
be maintained at a temperature of between 7 and 8 hundred degrees Fahr.,
a steady consumption of gas was required; but here too the supply far
exceeded the demand. The whole arrangement worked charmingly, requiring
only an odd glance now and then. The high temperature changing the
chlorate into a chloride, the oxygen was disengaged gradually but
abundantly, every eighteen pounds of chlorate of potash, furnishing the
seven pounds of oxygen necessary for the daily consumption of the
inmates of the Projectile.

Still--as the reader need hardly be reminded--it was not sufficient to
renew the exhausted oxygen; the complete purification of the air
required the absorption of the carbonic acid, exhaled from the lungs.
For nearly 12 hours the atmosphere had been gradually becoming more and
more charged with this deleterious gas, produced from the combustion of
the blood by the inspired oxygen. The Captain soon saw this, by noticing
with what difficulty Diana was panting. She even appeared to be
smothering, for the carbonic acid--as in the famous _Grotto del Cane_ on
the banks of Lake Agnano, near Naples--was collecting like water on the
floor of the Projectile, on account of its great specific gravity. It
already threatened the poor dog's life, though not yet endangering that
of her masters. The Captain, seeing this state of things, hastily laid
on the floor one or two cups containing caustic potash and water, and
stirred the mixture gently: this substance, having a powerful affinity
for carbonic acid, greedily absorbed it, and after a few moments the air
was completely purified.

The others had begun by this time to check off the state of the
instruments. The thermometer and the barometer were all right, except
one self-recorder of which the glass had got broken. An excellent
aneroid barometer, taken safe and sound out of its wadded box, was
carefully hung on a hook in the wall. It marked not only the pressure of
the air in the Projectile, but also the quantity of the watery vapor
that it contained. The needle, oscillating a little beyond thirty,
pointed pretty steadily at "_Fair_."

The mariner's compasses were also found to be quite free from injury. It
is, of course, hardly necessary to say that the needles pointed in no
particular direction, the magnetic pole of the Earth being unable at
such a distance to exercise any appreciable influence on them. But when
brought to the Moon, it was expected that these compasses, once more
subjected to the influence of the current, would attest certain
phenomena. In any case, it would be interesting to verify if the Earth
and her satellite were similarly affected by the magnetic forces.

A hypsometer, or instrument for ascertaining the heights of the Lunar
mountains by the barometric pressure under which water boils, a sextant
to measure the altitude of the Sun, a theodolite for taking horizontal
or vertical angles, telescopes, of indispensable necessity when the
travellers should approach the Moon,--all these instruments, carefully
examined, were found to be still in perfect working order,
notwithstanding the violence of the terrible shock at the start.

As to the picks, spades, and other tools that had been carefully
selected by the Captain; also the bags of various kinds of grain and
the bundles of various kinds of shrubs, which Ardan expected to
transplant to the Lunar plains--they were all still safe in their places
around the upper corners of the Projectile.

Some other articles were also up there which evidently possessed great
interest for the Frenchman. What they were nobody else seemed to know,
and he seemed to be in no hurry to tell. Every now and then, he would
climb up, by means of iron pins fixed in the wall, to inspect his
treasures; whatever they were, he arranged them and rearranged them with
evident pleasure, and as he rapidly passed a careful hand through
certain mysterious boxes, he joyfully sang in the falsest possible of
false voices the lively piece from _Nicolo_:

    _Le temps est beau, la route est belle,
    La promenade est un plaisir_.

    {The day is bright, our hearts are light.}
    {How sweet to rove through wood and dell.}

or the well known air in _Mignon_:

    _Legères hirondelles,
    Oiseaux bénis de Dieu,
    Ouvrez-ouvrez vos ailes,
    Envolez-vous! adieu!_

    {Farewell, happy Swallows, farewell!}
    {With summer for ever to dwell}
    {Ye leave our northern strand}
    {For the genial southern land}
    {Balmy with breezes bland.}
    {Return? Ah, who can tell?}
    {Farewell, happy Swallows, farewell!}

Barbican was much gratified to find that his rockets and other fireworks
had not received the least injury. He relied upon them for the
performance of a very important service as soon as the Projectile,
having passed the point of neutral attraction between the Earth and the
Moon, would begin to fall with accelerated velocity towards the Lunar
surface. This descent, though--thanks to the respective volumes of the
attracting bodies--six times less rapid than it would have been on the
surface of the Earth, would still be violent enough to dash the
Projectile into a thousand pieces. But Barbican confidently expected by
means of his powerful rockets to offer very considerable obstruction to
the violence of this fall, if not to counteract its terrible effects
altogether.

The inspection having thus given general satisfaction, the travellers
once more set themselves to watching external space through the lights
in the sides and the floor of the Projectile.

Everything still appeared to be in the same state as before. Nothing was
changed. The vast arch of the celestial dome glittered with stars, and
constellations blazed with a light clear and pure enough to throw an
astronomer into an ecstasy of admiration. Below them shone the Sun, like
the mouth of a white-hot furnace, his dazzling disc defined sharply on
the pitch-black back-ground of the sky. Above them the Moon, reflecting
back his rays from her glowing surface, appeared to stand motionless in
the midst of the starry host.

A little to the east of the Sun, they could see a pretty large dark
spot, like a hole in the sky, the broad silver fringe on one edge fading
off into a faint glimmering mist on the other--it was the Earth. Here
and there in all directions, nebulous masses gleamed like large flakes
of star dust, in which, from nadir to zenith, the eye could trace
without a break that vast ring of impalpable star powder, the famous
_Milky Way_, through the midst of which the beams of our glorious Sun
struggle with the dusky pallor of a star of only the fourth magnitude.

Our observers were never weary of gazing on this magnificent and novel
spectacle, of the grandeur of which, it is hardly necessary to say, no
description can give an adequate idea. What profound reflections it
suggested to their understandings! What vivid emotions it enkindled in
their imaginations! Barbican, desirous of commenting the story of the
journey while still influenced by these inspiring impressions, noted
carefully hour by hour every fact that signalized the beginning of his
enterprise. He wrote out his notes very carefully and systematically,
his round full hand, as business-like as ever, never betraying the
slightest emotion.

The Captain was quite as busy, but in a different way. Pulling out his
tablets, he reviewed his calculations regarding the motion of
projectiles, their velocities, ranges and paths, their retardations and
their accelerations, jotting down the figures with a rapidity wonderful
to behold. Ardan neither wrote nor calculated, but kept up an incessant
fire of small talk, now with Barbican, who hardly ever answered him,
now with M'Nicholl, who never heard him, occasionally with Diana, who
never understood him, but oftenest with himself, because, as he said, he
liked not only to talk to a sensible man but also to hear what a
sensible man had to say. He never stood still for a moment, but kept
"bobbing around" with the effervescent briskness of a bee, at one time
roosting at the top of the ladder, at another peering through the floor
light, now to the right, then to the left, always humming scraps from
the _Opera Bouffe_, but never changing the air. In the small space which
was then a whole world to the travellers, he represented to the life the
animation and loquacity of the French, and I need hardly say he played
his part to perfection.

The eventful day, or, to speak more correctly, the space of twelve hours
which with us forms a day, ended for our travellers with an abundant
supper, exquisitely cooked. It was highly enjoyed.

No incident had yet occurred of a nature calculated to shake their
confidence. Apprehending none therefore, full of hope rather and already
certain of success, they were soon lost in a peaceful slumber, whilst
the Projectile, moving rapidly, though with a velocity uniformly
retarding, still cleaved its way through the pathless regions of the
empyrean.




CHAPTER IV.

A CHAPTER FOR THE CORNELL GIRLS.


No incident worth recording occurred during the night, if night indeed
it could be called. In reality there was now no night or even day in the
Projectile, or rather, strictly speaking, it was always _night_ on the
upper end of the bullet, and always _day_ on the lower. Whenever,
therefore, the words _night_ and _day_ occur in our story, the reader
will readily understand them as referring to those spaces of time that
are so called in our Earthly almanacs, and were so measured by the
travellers' chronometers.

The repose of our friends must indeed have been undisturbed, if absolute
freedom from sound or jar of any kind could secure tranquillity. In
spite of its immense velocity, the Projectile still seemed to be
perfectly motionless. Not the slightest sign of movement could be
detected. Change of locality, though ever so rapid, can never reveal
itself to our senses when it takes place in a vacuum, or when the
enveloping atmosphere travels at the same rate as the moving body.
Though we are incessantly whirled around the Sun at the rate of about
seventy thousand miles an hour, which of us is conscious of the
slightest motion? In such a case, as far as sensation is concerned,
motion and repose are absolutely identical. Neither has any effect one
way or another on a material body. Is such a body in motion? It remains
in motion until some obstacle stops it. Is it at rest? It remains at
rest until some superior force compels it to change its position. This
indifference of bodies to motion or rest is what physicists call
_inertia_.

Barbican and his companions, therefore, shut up in the Projectile, could
readily imagine themselves to be completely motionless. Had they been
outside, the effect would have been precisely the same. No rush of air,
no jarring sensation would betray the slightest movement. But for the
sight of the Moon gradually growing larger above them, and of the Earth
gradually growing smaller beneath them, they could safely swear that
they were fast anchored in an ocean of deathlike immobility.

Towards the morning of next day (December 3), they were awakened by a
joyful, but quite unexpected sound.

"Cock-a-doodle! doo!" accompanied by a decided flapping of wings.

The Frenchman, on his feet in one instant and on the top of the ladder
in another, attempted to shut the lid of a half open box, speaking in an
angry but suppressed voice:

"Stop this hullabaloo, won't you? Do you want me to fail in my great
combination!"

"Hello?" cried Barbican and M'Nicholl, starting up and rubbing their
eyes.

"What noise was that?" asked Barbican.

"Seems to me I heard the crowing of a cock," observed the Captain.

"I never thought your ears could be so easily deceived, Captain," cried
Ardan, quickly, "Let us try it again," and, flapping his ribs with his
arms, he gave vent to a crow so loud and natural that the lustiest
chanticleer that ever saluted the orb of day might be proud of it.

The Captain roared right out, and even Barbican snickered, but as they
saw that their companion evidently wanted to conceal something, they
immediately assumed straight faces and pretended to think no more about
the matter.

"Barbican," said Ardan, coming down the ladder and evidently anxious to
change the conversation, "have you any idea of what I was thinking about
all night?"

"Not the slightest."

"I was thinking of the promptness of the reply you received last year
from the authorities of Cambridge University, when you asked them about
the feasibility of sending a bullet to the Moon. You know very well by
this time what a perfect ignoramus I am in Mathematics. I own I have
been often puzzled when thinking on what grounds they could form such a
positive opinion, in a case where I am certain that the calculation must
be an exceedingly delicate matter."

"The feasibility, you mean to say," replied Barbican, "not exactly of
sending a bullet to the Moon, but of sending it to the neutral point
between the Earth and the Moon, which lies at about nine-tenths of the
journey, where the two attractions counteract each other. Because that
point once passed, the Projectile would reach the Moon's surface by
virtue of its own weight."

"Well, reaching that neutral point be it;" replied Ardan, "but, once
more, I should like to know how they have been able to come at the
necessary initial velocity of 12,000 yards a second?"

"Nothing simpler," answered Barbican.

"Could you have done it yourself?" asked the Frenchman.

"Without the slightest difficulty. The Captain and myself could have
readily solved the problem, only the reply from the University saved us
the trouble."

"Well, Barbican, dear boy," observed Ardan, "all I've got to say is, you
might chop the head off my body, beginning with my feet, before you
could make me go through such a calculation."

"Simply because you don't understand Algebra," replied Barbican,
quietly.

"Oh! that's all very well!" cried Ardan, with an ironical smile. "You
great _x+y_ men think you settle everything by uttering the word
_Algebra_!"

"Ardan," asked Barbican, "do you think people could beat iron without a
hammer, or turn up furrows without a plough?"

"Hardly."

"Well, Algebra is an instrument or utensil just as much as a hammer or a
plough, and a very good instrument too if you know how to make use of
it."

"You're in earnest?"

"Quite so."

"And you can handle the instrument right before my eyes?"

"Certainly, if it interests you so much."

"You can show me how they got at the initial velocity of our
Projectile?"

"With the greatest pleasure. By taking into proper consideration all the
elements of the problem, viz.: (1) the distance between the centres of
the Earth and the Moon, (2) the Earth's radius, (3) its volume, and (4)
the Moon's volume, I can easily calculate what must be the initial
velocity, and that too by a very simple formula."

"Let us have the formula."

"In one moment; only I can't give you the curve really described by the
Projectile as it moves between the Earth and the Moon; this is to be
obtained by allowing for their combined movement around the Sun. I will
consider the Earth and the Sun to be motionless, that being sufficient
for our present purpose."

"Why so?"

"Because to give you that exact curve would be to solve a point in the
'Problem of the Three Bodies,' which Integral Calculus has not yet
reached."

"What!" cried Ardan, in a mocking tone, "is there really anything that
Mathematics can't do?"

"Yes," said Barbican, "there is still a great deal that Mathematics
can't even attempt."

"So far, so good;" resumed Ardan. "Now then what is this Integral
Calculus of yours?"

"It is a branch of Mathematics that has for its object the summation of
a certain infinite series of indefinitely small terms: but for the
solution of which, we must generally know the function of which a given
function is the differential coefficient. In other words," continued
Barbican, "in it we return from the differential coefficient, to the
function from which it was deduced."

"Clear as mud!" cried Ardan, with a hearty laugh.

"Now then, let me have a bit of paper and a pencil," added Barbican,
"and in half an hour you shall have your formula; meantime you can
easily find something interesting to do."

In a few seconds Barbican was profoundly absorbed in his problem, while
M'Nicholl was watching out of the window, and Ardan was busily employed
in preparing breakfast.

The morning meal was not quite ready, when Barbican, raising his head,
showed Ardan a page covered with algebraic signs at the end of which
stood the following formula:--

 1     2   2         r         m'    r       r
--- (v' - v ) = gr {--- - 1 + --- (----- - -----) }
 2                   x         m   d - x   d - r

"Which means?" asked Ardan.

"It means," said the Captain, now taking part in the discussion, "that
the half of _v_ prime squared minus _v_ squared equals _gr_ multiplied
by _r_ over _x_ minus one plus _m_ prime over _m_ multiplied by _r_ over
_d_ minus _x_ minus _r_ over _d_ minus _r_ ... that is--"

"That is," interrupted Ardan, in a roar of laughter, "_x_ stradlegs on
_y_, making for _z_ and jumping over _p_! Do _you_ mean to say you
understand the terrible jargon, Captain?"

"Nothing is clearer, Ardan."

"You too, Captain! Then of course I must give in gracefully, and declare
that the sun at noon-day is not more palpably evident than the sense of
Barbican's formula."

"You asked for Algebra, you know," observed Barbican.

"Rock crystal is nothing to it!"

"The fact is, Barbican," said the Captain, who had been looking over the
paper, "you have worked the thing out very well. You have the integral
equation of the living forces, and I have no doubt it will give us the
result sought for."

"Yes, but I should like to understand it, you know," cried Ardan: "I
would give ten years of the Captain's life to understand it!"

"Listen then," said Barbican. "Half of _v_ prime squared less _v_
squared, is the formula giving us the half variation of the living
force."

"Mac pretends he understands all that!"

"You need not be a _Solomon_ to do it," said the Captain. "All these
signs that you appear to consider so cabalistic form a language the
clearest, the shortest, and the most logical, for all those who can read
it."

"You pretend, Captain, that, by means of these hieroglyphics, far more
incomprehensible than the sacred Ibis of the Egyptians, you can
discover the velocity at which the Projectile should start?"

"Most undoubtedly," replied the Captain, "and, by the same formula I can
even tell you the rate of our velocity at any particular point of our
journey."

"You can?"

"I can."

"Then you're just as deep a one as our President."

"No, Ardan; not at all. The really difficult part of the question
Barbican has done. That is, to make out such an equation as takes into
account all the conditions of the problem. After that, it's a simple
affair of Arithmetic, requiring only a knowledge of the four rules to
work it out."

"Very simple," observed Ardan, who always got muddled at any kind of a
difficult sum in addition.

"Captain," said Barbican, "_you_ could have found the formulas too, if
you tried."

"I don't know about that," was the Captain's reply, "but I do know that
this formula is wonderfully come at."

"Now, Ardan, listen a moment," said Barbican, "and you will see what
sense there is in all these letters."

"I listen," sighed Ardan with the resignation of a martyr.

"_d_ is the distance from the centre of the Earth to the centre of the
Moon, for it is from the centres that we must calculate the
attractions."

"That I comprehend."

"_r_ is the radius of the Earth."

"That I comprehend."

"_m_ is the mass or volume of the Earth; _m_ prime that of the Moon. We
must take the mass of the two attracting bodies into consideration,
since attraction is in direct proportion to their masses."

"That I comprehend."

"_g_ is the gravity or the velocity acquired at the end of a second by a
body falling towards the centre of the Earth. Clear?"

"That I comprehend."

"Now I represent by _x_ the varying distance that separates the
Projectile from the centre of the Earth, and by _v_ prime its velocity
at that distance."

"That I comprehend."

"Finally, _v_ is its velocity when quitting our atmosphere."

"Yes," chimed in the Captain, "it is for this point, you see, that the
velocity had to be calculated, because we know already that the initial
velocity is exactly the three halves of the velocity when the Projectile
quits the atmosphere."

"That I don't comprehend," cried the Frenchman, energetically.

"It's simple enough, however," said Barbican.

"Not so simple as a simpleton," replied the Frenchman.

"The Captain merely means," said Barbican, "that at the instant the
Projectile quitted the terrestrial atmosphere it had already lost a
third of its initial velocity."

"So much as a third?"

"Yes, by friction against the atmospheric layers: the quicker its
motion, the greater resistance it encountered."

"That of course I admit, but your _v_ squared and your _v_ prime squared
rattle in my head like nails in a box!"

"The usual effect of Algebra on one who is a stranger to it; to finish
you, our next step is to express numerically the value of these several
symbols. Now some of them are already known, and some are to be
calculated."

"Hand the latter over to me," said the Captain.

"First," continued Barbican: "_r_, the Earth's radius is, in the
latitude of Florida, about 3,921 miles. _d_, the distance from the
centre of the Earth to the centre of the Moon is 56 terrestrial radii,
which the Captain calculates to be...?"

"To be," cried M'Nicholl working rapidly with his pencil, "219,572
miles, the moment the Moon is in her _perigee_, or nearest point to the
Earth."

"Very well," continued Barbican. "Now _m_ prime over _m_, that is the
ratio of the Moon's mass to that of the Earth is about the 1/81. _g_
gravity being at Florida about 32-1/4 feet, of course _g_ x _r_ must
be--how much, Captain?"

"38,465 miles," replied M'Nicholl.

"Now then?" asked Ardan.

[Illustration: MY HEAD IS SPLITTING WITH IT.]

"Now then," replied Barbican, "the expression having numerical values, I
am trying to find _v_, that is to say, the initial velocity which the
Projectile must possess in order to reach the point where the two
attractions neutralize each other. Here the velocity being null, _v_
prime becomes zero, and _x_ the required distance of this neutral point
must be represented by the nine-tenths of _d_, the distance between the
two centres."

"I have a vague kind of idea that it must be so," said Ardan.

"I shall, therefore, have the following result;" continued Barbican,
figuring up; "_x_ being nine-tenths of _d_, and _v_ prime being zero, my
formula becomes:--

 2            10 r     1    10 r     r
v  = gr {1 - ----- - ---- (----- - -----) }
               d      81     d     d - r   "

The Captain read it off rapidly.

"Right! that's correct!" he cried.

"You think so?" asked Barbican.

"As true as Euclid!" exclaimed M'Nicholl.

"Wonderful fellows," murmured the Frenchman, smiling with admiration.

"You understand now, Ardan, don't you?" asked Barbican.

"Don't I though?" exclaimed Ardan, "why my head is splitting with it!"

"Therefore," continued Barbican,

" 2             10 r     1    10 r     r
2v  = 2gr {1 - ----- - ---- (----- - -----) }
                 d      81     d     d - r   "

"And now," exclaimed M'Nicholl, sharpening his pencil; "in order to
obtain the velocity of the Projectile when leaving the atmosphere, we
have only to make a slight calculation."

The Captain, who before clerking on a Mississippi steamboat had been
professor of Mathematics in an Indiana university, felt quite at home at
the work. He rained figures from his pencil with a velocity that would
have made Marston stare. Page after page was filled with his
multiplications and divisions, while Barbican looked quietly on, and
Ardan impatiently stroked his head and ears to keep down a rising
head-ache.

"Well?" at last asked Barbican, seeing the Captain stop and throw a
somewhat hasty glance over his work.

"Well," answered M'Nicholl slowly but confidently, "the calculation is
made, I think correctly; and _v_, that is, the velocity of the
Projectile when quitting the atmosphere, sufficient to carry it to the
neutral point, should be at least ..."

"How much?" asked Barbican, eagerly.

"Should be at least 11,972 yards the first second."

"What!" cried Barbican, jumping off his seat. "How much did you say?"

"11,972 yards the first second it quits the atmosphere."

"Oh, malediction!" cried Barbican, with a gesture of terrible despair.

"What's the matter?" asked Ardan, very much surprised.

"Enough is the matter!" answered Barbican excitedly. "This velocity
having been diminished by a third, our initial velocity should have been
at least ..."

"17,958 yards the first second!" cried M'Nicholl, rapidly flourishing
his pencil.

"But the Cambridge Observatory having declared that 12,000 yards the
first second were sufficient, our Projectile started with no greater
velocity!"

"Well?" asked M'Nicholl.

"Well, such a velocity will never do!"

"How??" }
"How!!" } cried the Captain and Ardan in one voice.

"We can never reach the neutral point!"

"Thunder and lightning"

"Fire and Fury!"

"We can't get even halfway!"

"Heaven and Earth!"

"_Mille noms d'un boulet!_" cried Ardan, wildly gesticulating.

"And we shall fall back to the Earth!"

"Oh!"

"Ah!"

They could say no more. This fearful revelation took them like a stroke
of apoplexy.




CHAPTER V.

THE COLDS OF SPACE.


How could they imagine that the Observatory men had committed such a
blunder? Barbican would not believe it possible. He made the Captain go
over his calculation again and again; but no flaw was to be found in it.
He himself carefully examined it, figure after figure, but he could find
nothing wrong. They both took up the formula and subjected it to the
strongest tests; but it was invulnerable. There was no denying the fact.
The Cambridge professors had undoubtedly blundered in saying that an
initial velocity of 12,000 yards a second would be enough to carry them
to the neutral point. A velocity of nearly 18,000 yards would be the
very lowest required for such a purpose. They had simply forgotten to
allow a third for friction.

The three friends kept profound silence for some time. Breakfast now was
the last thing thought of. Barbican, with teeth grating, fingers
clutching, and eye-brows closely contracting, gazed grimly through the
window. The Captain, as a last resource, once more examined his
calculations, earnestly hoping to find a figure wrong. Ardan could
neither sit, stand nor lie still for a second, though he tried all
three. His silence, of course, did not last long.

"Ha! ha! ha!" he laughed bitterly. "Precious scientific men! Villainous
old hombogues! The whole set not worth a straw! I hope to gracious,
since we must fall, that we shall drop down plumb on Cambridge
Observatory, and not leave a single one of the miserable old women,
called professors, alive in the premises!"

A certain expression in Ardan's angry exclamation had struck the Captain
like a shot, and set his temples throbbing violently.

"_Must_ fall!" he exclaimed, starting up suddenly. "Let us see about
that! It is now seven o'clock in the morning. We must have, therefore,
been at least thirty-two hours on the road, and more than half of our
passage is already made. If we are going to fall at all, we must be
falling now! I'm certain we're not, but, Barbican, you have to find it
out!"

Barbican caught the idea like lightning, and, seizing a compass, he
began through the floor window to measure the visual angle of the
distant Earth. The apparent immobility of the Projectile allowed him to
do this with great exactness. Then laying aside the instrument, and
wiping off the thick drops of sweat that bedewed his forehead, he began
jotting down some figures on a piece of paper. The Captain looked on
with keen interest; he knew very well that Barbican was calculating
their distance from the Earth by the apparent measure of the terrestrial
diameter, and he eyed him anxiously.

Pretty soon his friends saw a color stealing into Barbican's pale face,
and a triumphant light glittering in his eye.

"No, my brave boys!" he exclaimed at last throwing down his pencil,
"we're not falling! Far from it, we are at present more than 150
thousand miles from the Earth!"

"Hurrah!" }
"Bravo!"  } cried M'Nicholl and Ardan, in a breath.

"We have passed the point where we should have stopped if we had had no
more initial velocity than the Cambridge men allowed us!"

"Hurrah! hurrah!"

"Bravo, Bravissimo!"

"And we're still going up!"

"Glory, glory, hallelujah!" sang M'Nicholl, in the highest excitement.

"_Vive ce cher Barbican!_" cried Ardan, bursting into French as usual
whenever his feelings had the better of him.

"Of course we're marching on!" continued M'Nicholl, "and I know the
reason why, too. Those 400,000 pounds of gun-cotton gave us greater
initial velocity than we had expected!"

"You're right, Captain!" added Barbican; "besides, you must not forget
that, by getting rid of the water, the Projectile was relieved of
considerable weight!"

"Correct again!" cried the Captain. "I had not thought of that!"

"Therefore, my brave boys," continued Barbican, with some excitement;
"away with melancholy! We're all right!"

"Yes; everything is lovely and the goose hangs high!" cried the Captain,
who on grand occasions was not above a little slang.

"Talking of goose reminds me of breakfast," cried Ardan; "I assure you,
my fright has not taken away my appetite!"

"Yes," continued Barbican. "Captain, you're quite right. Our initial
velocity very fortunately was much greater than what our Cambridge
friends had calculated for us!"

"Hang our Cambridge friends and their calculations!" cried Ardan, with
some asperity; "as usual with your scientific men they've more brass
than brains! If we're not now bed-fellows with the oysters in the Gulf
of Mexico, no thanks to our kind Cambridge friends. But talking of
oysters, let me remind you again that breakfast is ready."

The meal was a most joyous one. They ate much, they talked more, but
they laughed most. The little incident of Algebra had certainly very
much enlivened the situation.

"Now, my boys," Ardan went on, "all things thus turning out quite
comfortable, I would just ask you why we should not succeed? We are
fairly started. No breakers ahead that I can see. No rock on our road.
It is freer than the ships on the raging ocean, aye, freer than the
balloons in the blustering air. But the ship arrives at her destination;
the balloon, borne on the wings of the wind, rises to as high an
altitude as can be endured; why then should not our Projectile reach the
Moon?"

"It _will_ reach the Moon!" nodded Barbican.

"We shall reach the Moon or know for what!" cried M'Nicholl,
enthusiastically.

"The great American nation must not be disappointed!" continued Ardan.
"They are the only people on Earth capable of originating such an
enterprise! They are the only people capable of producing a Barbican!"

"Hurrah!" cried M'Nicholl.

"That point settled," continued the Frenchman, "another question comes
up to which I have not yet called your attention. When we get to the
Moon, what shall we do there? How are we going to amuse ourselves? I'm
afraid our life there will be awfully slow!"

His companions emphatically disclaimed the possibility of such a thing.

"You may deny it, but I know better, and knowing better, I have laid in
my stores accordingly. You have but to choose. I possess a varied
assortment. Chess, draughts, cards, dominoes--everything in fact, but a
billiard table?"

"What!" exclaimed Barbican; "cumbered yourself with such gimcracks?"

"Such gimcracks are not only good to amuse ourselves with, but are
eminently calculated also to win us the friendship of the Selenites."

"Friend Michael," said Barbican, "if the Moon is inhabited at all, her
inhabitants must have appeared several thousand years before the advent
of Man on our Earth, for there seems to be very little doubt that Luna
is considerably older than Terra in her present state. Therefore,
Selenites, if their brain is organized like our own, must have by this
time invented all that we are possessed of, and even much which we are
still to invent in the course of ages. The probability is that, instead
of their learning from us, we shall have much to learn from them."

"What!" asked Ardan, "you think they have artists like Phidias, Michael
Angelo and Raphael?"

"Certainly."

"And poets like Homer, Virgil, Dante, Shakspeare, Göthe and Hugo?"

"Not a doubt of it."

"And philosophers like Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Bacon, Kant?"

"Why not?"

"And scientists like Euclid, Archimedes, Copernicus, Newton, Pascal?"

"I should think so."

"And famous actors, and singers, and composers, and--and photographers?"

"I could almost swear to it."

"Then, dear boy, since they have gone ahead as far as we and even
farther, why have not those great Selenites tried to start a
communication with the Earth? Why have they not fired a projectile from
the regions lunar to the regions terrestrial?"

"Who says they have not done so?" asked Barbican, coolly.

"Attempting such a communication," observed the Captain, "would
certainly be much easier for them than for us, principally for two
reasons. First, attraction on the Moon's surface being six times less
than on the Earth's, a projectile could be sent off more rapidly;
second, because, as this projectile need be sent only 24 instead of 240
thousand miles, they could do it with a quantity of powder ten times
less than what we should require for the same purpose."

"Then I ask again," said the Frenchman; "why haven't they made such an
attempt?"

"And I reply again," answered Barbican. "How do you know that they have
not made such an attempt?"

"Made it? When?"

"Thousands of years ago, before the invention of writing, before even
the appearance of Man on the Earth."

"But the bullet?" asked Ardan, triumphantly; "Where's the bullet?
Produce the bullet!"

"Friend Michael," answered Barbican, with a quiet smile, "you appear to
forget that the 5/6 of the surface of our Earth is water. 5 to 1,
therefore, that the bullet is more likely to be lying this moment at the
bottom of the Atlantic or the Pacific than anywhere else on the surface
of our globe. Besides, it may have sunk into some weak point of the
surface, at the early epoch when the crust of the Earth had not acquired
sufficient solidity."

"Captain," said Ardan, turning with a smile to M'Nicholl; "no use in
trying to catch Barby; slippery as an eel, he has an answer for
everything. Still I have a theory on the subject myself, which I think
it no harm to ventilate. It is this: The Selenites have never sent us
any projectile at all, simply because they had no gunpowder: being older
and wiser than we, they were never such fools as to invent any.--But,
what's that? Diana howling for her breakfast! Good! Like genuine
scientific men, while squabbling over nonsense, we let the poor animals
die of hunger. Excuse us, Diana; it is not the first time the little
suffer from the senseless disputes of the great."

So saying he laid before the animal a very toothsome pie, and
contemplated with evident pleasure her very successful efforts towards
its hasty and complete disappearance.

"Looking at Diana," he went on, "makes me almost wish we had made a
Noah's Ark of our Projectile by introducing into it a pair of all the
domestic animals!"

"Not room enough," observed Barbican.

"No doubt," remarked the Captain, "the ox, the cow, the horse, the goat,
all the ruminating animals would be very useful in the Lunar continent.
But we couldn't turn our Projectile into a stable, you know."

"Still, we might have made room for a pair of poor little donkeys!"
observed Ardan; "how I love the poor beasts. Fellow feeling, you will
say. No doubt, but there really is no animal I pity more. They are the
most ill-treated brutes in all creation. They are not only banged during
life; they are banged worse after death!"

"Hey! How do you make that out?" asked his companions, surprised.

"Because we make their skins into drum heads!" replied Ardan, with an
air, as if answering a conundrum.

Barbican and M'Nicholl could hardly help laughing at the absurd reply of
their lively companion, but their hilarity was soon stopped by the
expression his face assumed as he bent over Satellite's body, where it
lay stretched on the sofa.

"What's the matter now?" asked Barbican.

"Satellite's attack is over," replied Ardan.

"Good!" said M'Nicholl, misunderstanding him.

"Yes, I suppose it is good for the poor fellow," observed Ardan, in
melancholy accents. "Life with one's skull broken is hardly an enviable
possession. Our grand acclimatization project is knocked sky high, in
more senses than one!"

There was no doubt of the poor dog's death. The expression of Ardan's
countenance, as he looked at his friends, was of a very rueful order.

"Well," said the practical Barbican, "there's no help for that now; the
next thing to be done is to get rid of the body. We can't keep it here
with us forty-eight hours longer."

"Of course not," replied the Captain, "nor need we; our lights, being
provided with hinges, can be lifted back. What is to prevent us from
opening one of them, and flinging the body out through it!"

The President of the Gun Club reflected a few minutes; then he spoke:

"Yes, it can be done; but we must take the most careful precautions."

"Why so?" asked Ardan.

"For two simple reasons;" replied Barbican; "the first refers to the air
enclosed in the Projectile, and of which we must be very careful to lose
only the least possible quantity."

"But as we manufacture air ourselves!" objected Ardan.

"We manufacture air only partly, friend Michael," replied Barbican. "We
manufacture only oxygen; we can't supply nitrogen--By the bye, Ardan,
won't you watch the apparatus carefully every now and then to see that
the oxygen is not generated too freely. Very serious consequences would
attend an immoderate supply of oxygen--No, we can't manufacture
nitrogen, which is so absolutely necessary for our air and which might
escape readily through the open windows."

"What! the few seconds we should require for flinging out poor
Satellite?"

"A very few seconds indeed they should be," said Barbican, very gravely.

"Your second reason?" asked Ardan.

"The second reason is, that we must not allow the external cold, which
must be exceedingly great, to penetrate into our Projectile and freeze
us alive."

"But the Sun, you know--"

"Yes, the Sun heats our Projectile, but it does not heat the vacuum
through which we are now floating. Where there is no air there can
neither be heat nor light; just as wherever the rays of the Sun do not
arrive directly, it must be both cold and dark. The temperature around
us, if there be anything that can be called temperature, is produced
solely by stellar radiation. I need not say how low that is in the
scale, or that it would be the temperature to which our Earth should
fall, if the Sun were suddenly extinguished."

"Little fear of that for a few more million years," said M'Nicholl.

"Who can tell?" asked Ardan. "Besides, even admitting that the Sun will
not soon be extinguished, what is to prevent the Earth from shooting
away from him?"

"Let friend Michael speak," said Barbican, with a smile, to the Captain;
"we may learn something."

"Certainly you may," continued the Frenchman, "if you have room for
anything new. Were we not struck by a comet's tail in 1861?"

"So it was said, anyhow," observed the Captain. "I well remember what
nonsense there was in the papers about the 'phosphorescent auroral
glare.'"

"Well," continued the Frenchman, "suppose the comet of 1861 influenced
the Earth by an attraction superior to the Sun's. What would be the
consequence? Would not the Earth follow the attracting body, become its
satellite, and thus at last be dragged off to such a distance that the
Sun's rays could no longer excite heat on her surface?"

"Well, that might possibly occur," said Barbican slowly, "but even then
I question if the consequences would be so terrible as you seem to
apprehend."

"Why not?"

"Because the cold and the heat might still manage to be nearly equalized
on our globe. It has been calculated that, had the Earth been carried
off by the comet of '61, when arrived at her greatest distance, she
would have experienced a temperature hardly sixteen times greater than
the heat we receive from the Moon, which, as everybody knows, produces
no appreciable effect, even when concentrated to a focus by the most
powerful lenses."

"Well then," exclaimed Ardan, "at such a temperature--"

"Wait a moment," replied Barbican. "Have you never heard of the
principle of compensation? Listen to another calculation. Had the Earth
been dragged along with the comet, it has been calculated that at her
perihelion, or nearest point to the Sun, she would have to endure a heat
28,000 times greater than our mean summer temperature. But this heat,
fully capable of turning the rocks into glass and the oceans into vapor,
before proceeding to such extremity, must have first formed a thick
interposing ring of clouds, and thus considerably modified the excessive
temperature. Therefore, between the extreme cold of the aphelion and the
excessive heat of the perihelion, by the great law of compensation, it
is probable that the mean temperature would be tolerably endurable."

"At how many degrees is the temperature of the interplanetary space
estimated?" asked M'Nicholl.

"Some time ago," replied Barbican, "this temperature was considered to
be very low indeed--millions and millions of degrees below zero. But
Fourrier of Auxerre, a distinguished member of the _Académie des
Sciences_, whose _Mémoires_ on the temperature of the Planetary spaces
appeared about 1827, reduced these figures to considerably diminished
proportions. According to his careful estimation, the temperature of
space is not much lower than 70 or 80 degrees Fahr. below zero."

"No more?" asked Ardan.

"No more," answered Barbican, "though I must acknowledge we have only
his word for it, as the _Mémoire_ in which he had recorded all the
elements of that important determination, has been lost somewhere, and
is no longer to be found."

"I don't attach the slightest importance to his, or to any man's words,
unless they are sustained by reliable evidence," exclaimed M'Nicholl.
"Besides, if I'm not very much mistaken, Pouillet--another countryman of
yours, Ardan, and an Academician as well as Fourrier--esteems the
temperature of interplanetary spaces to be at least 256° Fahr. below
zero. This we can easily verify for ourselves this moment by actual
experiment."

"Not just now exactly," observed Barbican, "for the solar rays,
striking our Projectile directly, would give us a very elevated instead
of a very low temperature. But once arrived at the Moon, during those
nights fifteen days long, which each of her faces experiences
alternately, we shall have plenty of time to make an experiment with
every condition in our favor. To be sure, our Satellite is at present
moving in a vacuum."

"A vacuum?" asked Ardan; "a perfect vacuum?"

"Well, a perfect vacuum as far as air is concerned."

"But is the air replaced by nothing?"

"Oh yes," replied Barbican. "By ether."

"Ah, ether! and what, pray, is ether?"

"Ether, friend Michael, is an elastic gas consisting of imponderable
atoms, which, as we are told by works on molecular physics, are, in
proportion to their size, as far apart as the celestial bodies are from
each other in space. This distance is less than the 1/3000000 x 1/1000',
or the one trillionth of a foot. The vibrations of the molecules of this
ether produce the sensations of light and heat, by making 430 trillions
of undulations per second, each undulation being hardly more than the
one ten-millionth of an inch in width."

"Trillions per second! ten-millionths of an inch in width!" cried Ardan.
"These oscillations have been very neatly counted and ticketed, and
checked off! Ah, friend Barbican," continued the Frenchman, shaking his
head, "these numbers are just tremendous guesses, frightening the ear
but revealing nothing to the intelligence."

"To get ideas, however, we must calculate--"

"No, no!" interrupted Ardan: "not calculate, but compare. A trillion
tells you nothing--Comparison, everything. For instance, you say, the
volume of _Uranus_ is 76 times greater than the Earth's; _Saturn's_ 900
times greater; _Jupiter's_ 1300 times greater; the Sun's 1300 thousand
times greater--You may tell me all that till I'm tired hearing it, and I
shall still be almost as ignorant as ever. For my part I prefer to be
told one of those simple comparisons that I find in the old almanacs:
The Sun is a globe two feet in diameter; _Jupiter_, a good sized orange;
_Saturn_, a smaller orange; _Neptune_, a plum; _Uranus_, a good sized
cherry; the Earth, a pea; _Venus_, also a pea but somewhat smaller;
_Mars_, a large pin's head; _Mercury_, a mustard seed; _Juno_,
_Ceres_, _Vesta_, _Pallas_, and the other asteroids so many grains
of sand. Be told something like that, and you have got at least the tail
of an idea!"

This learned burst of Ardan's had the natural effect of making his
hearers forget what they had been arguing about, and they therefore
proceeded at once to dispose of Satellite's body. It was a simple matter
enough--no more than to fling it out of the Projectile into space, just
as the sailors get rid of a dead body by throwing it into the sea. Only
in this operation they had to act, as Barbican recommended, with the
utmost care and dispatch, so as to lose as little as possible of the
internal air, which, by its great elasticity, would violently strive to
escape. The bolts of the floor-light, which was more than a foot in
diameter, were carefully unscrewed, while Ardan, a good deal affected,
prepared to launch his dog's body into space. The glass, worked by a
powerful lever which enabled it to overcome the pressure of the enclosed
air, turned quickly on its hinges, and poor Satellite was dropped out.
The whole operation was so well managed that very little air escaped,
and ever afterwards Barbican employed the same means to rid the
Projectile of all the litter and other useless matter by which it was
occasionally encumbered.

The evening of this third of December wore away without further
incident. As soon as Barbican had announced that the Projectile was
still winging its way, though with retarded velocity, towards the lunar
disc, the travellers quietly retired to rest.

[Illustration: POOR SATELLITE WAS DROPPED OUT.]




CHAPTER VI.

INSTRUCTIVE CONVERSATION.


On the fourth of December, the Projectile chronometers marked five
o'clock in the morning, just as the travellers woke up from a pleasant
slumber. They had now been 54 hours on their journey. As to lapse of
_time_, they had passed not much more than half of the number of hours
during which their trip was to last; but, as to lapse of _space_, they
had already accomplished very nearly the seven-tenths of their passage.
This difference between time and distance was due to the regular
retardation of their velocity.

They looked at the earth through the floor-light, but it was little more
than visible--a black spot drowned in the solar rays. No longer any sign
of a crescent, no longer any sign of ashy light. Next day, towards
midnight, the Earth was to be _new_, at the precise moment when the Moon
was to be _full_. Overhead, they could see the Queen of Night coming
nearer and nearer to the line followed by the Projectile, and evidently
approaching the point where both should meet at the appointed moment.
All around, the black vault of heaven was dotted with luminous points
which seemed to move somewhat, though, of course, in their extreme
distance their relative size underwent no change. The Sun and the stars
looked exactly as they had appeared when observed from the Earth. The
Moon indeed had become considerably enlarged in size, but the
travellers' telescopes were still too weak to enable them to make any
important observation regarding the nature of her surface, or that might
determine her topographical or geological features.

Naturally, therefore, the time slipped away in endless conversation. The
Moon, of course, was the chief topic. Each one contributed his share of
peculiar information, or peculiar ignorance, as the case might be.
Barbican and M'Nicholl always treated the subject gravely, as became
learned scientists, but Ardan preferred to look on things with the eye
of fancy. The Projectile, its situation, its direction, the incidents
possible to occur, the precautions necessary to take in order to break
the fall on the Moon's surface--these and many other subjects furnished
endless food for constant debate and inexhaustible conjectures.

For instance, at breakfast that morning, a question of Ardan's regarding
the Projectile drew from Barbican an answer curious enough to be
reported.

"Suppose, on the night that we were shot up from Stony Hill," said
Ardan, "suppose the Projectile had encountered some obstacle powerful
enough to stop it--what would be the consequence of the sudden halt?"

"But," replied Barbican, "I don't understand what obstacle it could have
met powerful enough to stop it."

"Suppose some obstacle, for the sake of argument," said Ardan.

"Suppose what can't be supposed," replied the matter-of-fact Barbican,
"what cannot possibly be supposed, unless indeed the original impulse
proved too weak. In that case, the velocity would have decreased by
degrees, but the Projectile itself would not have suddenly stopped."

"Suppose it had struck against some body in space."

"What body, for instance?"

"Well, that enormous bolide which we met."

"Oh!" hastily observed the Captain, "the Projectile would have been
dashed into a thousand pieces and we along with it."

"Better than that," observed Barbican; "we should have been burned
alive."

"Burned alive!" laughed Ardan. "What a pity we missed so interesting an
experiment! How I should have liked to find out how it felt!"

"You would not have much time to record your observations, friend
Michael, I assure you," observed Barbican. "The case is plain enough.
Heat and motion are convertible terms. What do we mean by heating water?
Simply giving increased, in fact, violent motion to its molecules."

"Well!" exclaimed the Frenchman, "that's an ingenious theory any how!"

"Not only ingenious but correct, my dear friend, for it completely
explains all the phenomena of caloric. Heat is nothing but molecular
movement, the violent oscillation of the particles of a body. When you
apply the brakes to the train, the train stops. But what has become of
its motion? It turns into heat and makes the brakes hot. Why do people
grease the axles? To hinder them from getting too hot, which they
assuredly would become if friction was allowed to obstruct the motion.
You understand, don't you?"

"Don't I though?" replied Ardan, apparently in earnest. "Let me show you
how thoroughly. When I have been running hard and long, I feel myself
perspiring like a bull and hot as a furnace. Why am I then forced to
stop? Simply because my motion has been transformed into heat! Of
course, I understand all about it!"

Barbican smiled a moment at this comical illustration of his theory and
then went on:

"Accordingly, in case of a collision it would have been all over
instantly with our Projectile. You have seen what becomes of the bullet
that strikes the iron target. It is flattened out of all shape;
sometimes it is even melted into a thin film. Its motion has been turned
into heat. Therefore, I maintain that if our Projectile had struck that
bolide, its velocity, suddenly checked, would have given rise to a heat
capable of completely volatilizing it in less than a second."

"Not a doubt of it!" said the Captain. "President," he added after a
moment, "haven't they calculated what would be the result, if the Earth
were suddenly brought to a stand-still in her journey, through her
orbit?"

"It has been calculated," answered Barbican, "that in such a case so
much heat would be developed as would instantly reduce her to vapor."

"Hm!" exclaimed Ardan; "a remarkably simple way for putting an end to
the world!"

"And supposing the Earth to fall into the Sun?" asked the Captain.

"Such a fall," answered Barbican, "according to the calculations of
Tyndall and Thomson, would develop an amount of heat equal to that
produced by sixteen hundred globes of burning coal, each globe equal in
size to the earth itself. Furthermore such a fall would supply the Sun
with at least as much heat as he expends in a hundred years!"

"A hundred years! Good! Nothing like accuracy!" cried Ardan. "Such
infallible calculators as Messrs. Tyndall and Thomson I can easily
excuse for any airs they may give themselves. They must be of an order
much higher than that of ordinary mortals like us!"

"I would not answer myself for the accuracy of such intricate problems,"
quietly observed Barbican; "but there is no doubt whatever regarding one
fact: motion suddenly interrupted always develops heat. And this has
given rise to another theory regarding the maintenance of the Sun's
temperature at a constant point. An incessant rain of bolides falling on
his surface compensates sufficiently for the heat that he is
continually giving forth. It has been calculated--"

"Good Lord deliver us!" cried Ardan, putting his hands to his ears:
"here comes Tyndall and Thomson again!"

--"It has been calculated," continued Barbican, not heeding the
interruption, "that the shock of every bolide drawn to the Sun's surface
by gravity, must produce there an amount of heat equal to that of the
combustion of four thousand blocks of coal, each the same size as the
falling bolide."

"I'll wager another cent that our bold savants calculated the heat of
the Sun himself," cried Ardan, with an incredulous laugh.

"That is precisely what they have done," answered Barbican referring to
his memorandum book; "the heat emitted by the Sun," he continued, "is
exactly that which would be produced by the combustion of a layer of
coal enveloping the Sun's surface, like an atmosphere, 17 miles in
thickness."

"Well done! and such heat would be capable of--?"

"Of melting in an hour a stratum of ice 2400 feet thick, or, according
to another calculation, of raising a globe of ice-cold water, 3 times
the size of our Earth, to the boiling point in an hour."

"Why not calculate the exact fraction of a second it would take to cook
a couple of eggs?" laughed Ardan. "I should as soon believe in one
calculation as in the other.--But--by the by--why does not such extreme
heat cook us all up like so many beefsteaks?"

"For two very good and sufficient reasons," answered Barbican. "In the
first place, the terrestrial atmosphere absorbs the 4/10 of the solar
heat. In the second, the quantity of solar heat intercepted by the Earth
is only about the two billionth part of all that is radiated."

"How fortunate to have such a handy thing as an atmosphere around us,"
cried the Frenchman; "it not only enables us to breathe, but it actually
keeps us from sizzling up like griskins."

"Yes," said the Captain, "but unfortunately we can't say so much for the
Moon."

"Oh pshaw!" cried Ardan, always full of confidence. "It's all right
there too! The Moon is either inhabited or she is not. If she is, the
inhabitants must breathe. If she is not, there must be oxygen enough
left for we, us and co., even if we should have to go after it to the
bottom of the ravines, where, by its gravity, it must have accumulated!
So much the better! we shall not have to climb those thundering
mountains!"

So saying, he jumped up and began to gaze with considerable interest on
the lunar disc, which just then was glittering with dazzling brightness.

"By Jove!" he exclaimed at length; "it must be pretty hot up there!"

"I should think so," observed the Captain; "especially when you remember
that the day up there lasts 360 hours!"

"Yes," observed Barbican, "but remember on the other hand that the
nights are just as long, and, as the heat escapes by radiation, the mean
temperature cannot be much greater than that of interplanetary space."

"A high old place for living in!" cried Ardan. "No matter! I wish we
were there now! Wouldn't it be jolly, dear boys, to have old Mother
Earth for our Moon, to see her always on our sky, never rising, never
setting, never undergoing any change except from New Earth to Last
Quarter! Would not it be fun to trace the shape of our great Oceans and
Continents, and to say: 'there is the Mediterranean! there is China!
there is the gulf of Mexico! there is the white line of the Rocky
Mountains where old Marston is watching for us with his big telescope!'
Then we should see every line, and brightness, and shadow fade away by
degrees, as she came nearer and nearer to the Sun, until at last she sat
completely lost in his dazzling rays! But--by the way--Barbican, are
there any eclipses in the Moon?"

"O yes; solar eclipses" replied Barbican, "must always occur whenever
the centres of the three heavenly bodies are in the same line, the Earth
occupying the middle place. However, such eclipses must always be
annular, as the Earth, projected like a screen on the solar disc, allows
more than half of the Sun to be still visible."

"How is that?" asked M'Nicholl, "no total eclipses in the Moon? Surely
the cone of the Earth's shadow must extend far enough to envelop her
surface?"

"It does reach her, in one sense," replied Barbican, "but it does not in
another. Remember the great refraction of the solar rays that must be
produced by the Earth's atmosphere. It is easy to show that this
refraction prevents the Sun from ever being totally invisible. See
here!" he continued, pulling out his tablets, "Let _a_ represent the
horizontal parallax, and _b_ the half of the Sun's apparent diameter--"

"Ouch!" cried the Frenchman, making a wry face, "here comes Mr. _x_
square riding to the mischief on a pair of double zeros again! Talk
English, or Yankee, or Dutch, or Greek, and I'm your man! Even a little
Arabic I can digest! But hang me, if I can endure your Algebra!"

"Well then, talking Yankee," replied Barbican with a smile, "the mean
distance of the Moon from the Earth being sixty terrestrial radii, the
length of the conic shadow, in consequence of atmospheric refraction, is
reduced to less than forty-two radii. Consequently, at the moment of an
eclipse, the Moon is far beyond the reach of the real shadow, so that
she can see not only the border rays of the Sun, but even those
proceeding from his very centre."

"Oh then," cried Ardan with a loud laugh, "we have an eclipse of the Sun
at the moment when the Sun is quite visible! Isn't that very like a
bull, Mr. Philosopher Barbican?"

"Yet it is perfectly true notwithstanding," answered Barbican. "At such
a moment the Sun is not eclipsed, because we can see him: and then again
he is eclipsed because we see him only by means of a few of his rays,
and even these have lost nearly all their brightness in their passage
through the terrestrial atmosphere!"

"Barbican is right, friend Michael," observed the Captain slowly: "the
same phenomenon occurs on earth every morning at sunrise, when
refraction shows us

                           '_the Sun new ris'n
    Looking through the horizontal misty air,
    Shorn of his beams._'"

"He must be right," said Ardan, who, to do him justice, though quick at
seeing a reason, was quicker to acknowledge its justice: "yes, he must
be right, because I begin to understand at last very clearly what he
really meant. However, we can judge for ourselves when we get
there.--But, apropos of nothing, tell me, Barbican, what do you think of
the Moon being an ancient comet, which had come so far within the sphere
of the Earth's attraction as to be kept there and turned into a
satellite?"

"Well, that _is_ an original idea!" said Barbican with a smile.

"My ideas generally are of that category," observed Ardan with an
affectation of dry pomposity.

"Not this time, however, friend Michael," observed M'Nicholl.

"Oh! I'm a plagiarist, am I?" asked the Frenchman, pretending to be
irritated.

"Well, something very like it," observed M'Nicholl quietly. "Apollonius
Rhodius, as I read one evening in the Philadelphia Library, speaks of
the Arcadians of Greece having a tradition that their ancestors were so
ancient that they inhabited the Earth long before the Moon had ever
become our satellite. They therefore called them [Greek: _Proselênoi_]
or _Ante-lunarians_. Now starting with some such wild notion as this,
certain scientists have looked on the Moon as an ancient comet brought
close enough to the Earth to be retained in its orbit by terrestrial
attraction."

"Why may not there be something plausible in such a hypothesis?" asked
Ardan with some curiosity.

"There is nothing whatever in it," replied Barbican decidedly: "a simple
proof is the fact that the Moon does not retain the slightest trace of
the vaporous envelope by which comets are always surrounded."

"Lost her tail you mean," said Ardan. "Pooh! Easy to account for that!
It might have got cut off by coming too close to the Sun!"

"It might, friend Michael, but an amputation by such means is not very
likely."

"No? Why not?"

"Because--because--By Jove, I can't say, because I don't know," cried
Barbican with a quiet smile on his countenance.

"Oh what a lot of volumes," cried Ardan, "could be made out of what we
don't know!"

"At present, for instance," observed M'Nicholl, "I don't know what
o'clock it is."

"Three o'clock!" said Barbican, glancing at his chronometer.

"No!" cried Ardan in surprise. "Bless us! How rapidly the time passes
when we are engaged in scientific conversation! Ouf! I'm getting
decidedly too learned! I feel as if I had swallowed a library!"

"I feel," observed M'Nicholl, "as if I had been listening to a lecture
on Astronomy in the _Star_ course."

"Better stir around a little more," said the Frenchman; "fatigue of body
is the best antidote to such severe mental labor as ours. I'll run up
the ladder a bit." So saying, he paid another visit to the upper portion
of the Projectile and remained there awhile whistling _Malbrouk_, whilst
his companions amused themselves in looking through the floor window.

Ardan was coming down the ladder, when his whistling was cut short by a
sudden exclamation of surprise.

"What's the matter?" asked Barbican quickly, as he looked up and saw the
Frenchman pointing to something outside the Projectile.

Approaching the window, Barbican saw with much surprise a sort of
flattened bag floating in space and only a few yards off. It seemed
perfectly motionless, and, consequently, the travellers knew that it
must be animated by the same ascensional movement as themselves.

"What on earth can such a consarn be, Barbican?" asked Ardan, who every
now and then liked to ventilate his stock of American slang. "Is it one
of those particles of meteoric matter you were speaking of just now,
caught within the sphere of our Projectile's attraction and accompanying
us to the Moon?"

"What I am surprised at," observed the Captain, "is that though the
specific gravity of that body is far inferior to that of our Projectile,
it moves with exactly the same velocity."

"Captain," said Barbican, after a moment's reflection, "I know no more
what that object is than you do, but I can understand very well why it
keeps abreast with the Projectile."

"Very well then, why?"

"Because, my dear Captain, we are moving through a vacuum, and because
all bodies fall or move--the same thing--with equal velocity through a
vacuum, no matter what may be their shape or their specific gravity. It
is the air alone that makes a difference of weight. Produce an
artificial vacuum in a glass tube and you will see that all objects
whatever falling through, whether bits of feather or grains of shot,
move with precisely the same rapidity. Up here, in space, like cause and
like effect."

"Correct," assented M'Nicholl. "Everything therefore that we shall throw
out of the Projectile is bound to accompany us to the Moon."

"Well, we _were_ smart!" cried Ardan suddenly.

"How so, friend Michael?" asked Barbican.

"Why not have packed the Projectile with ever so many useful objects,
books, instruments, tools, et cetera, and fling them out into space once
we were fairly started! They would have all followed us safely! Nothing
would have been lost! And--now I think on it--why not fling ourselves
out through the window? Shouldn't we be as safe out there as that
bolide? What fun it would be to feel ourselves sustained and upborne in
the ether, more highly favored even than the birds, who must keep on
flapping their wings continually to prevent themselves from falling!"

"Very true, my dear boy," observed Barbican; "but how could we breathe?"

"It's a fact," exclaimed the Frenchman. "Hang the air for spoiling our
fun! So we must remain shut up in our Projectile?"

"Not a doubt of it!"

--"Oh Thunder!" roared Ardan, suddenly striking his forehead.

"What ails you?" asked the Captain, somewhat surprised.

"Now I know what that bolide of ours is! Why didn't we think of it
before? It is no asteroid! It is no particle of meteoric matter! Nor is
it a piece of a shattered planet!"

"What is it then?" asked both of his companions in one voice.

[Illustration: SATELLITE'S BODY FLYING THROUGH SPACE.]

"It is nothing more or less than the body of the dog that we threw out
yesterday!"

So in fact it was. That shapeless, unrecognizable mass, melted,
expunged, flat as a bladder under an unexhausted receiver, drained of
its air, was poor Satellite's body, flying like a rocket through space,
and rising higher and higher in close company with the rapidly ascending
Projectile!




CHAPTER VII.

A HIGH OLD TIME.


A new phenomenon, therefore, strange but logical, startling but
admitting of easy explanation, was now presented to their view,
affording a fresh subject for lively discussion. Not that they disputed
much about it. They soon agreed on a principle from which they readily
deducted the following general law: _Every object thrown out of the
Projectile should partake of the Projectile's motion: it should
therefore follow the same path, and never cease to move until the
Projectile itself came to a stand-still._

But, in sober truth, they were at anything but a loss of subjects of
warm discussion. As the end of their journey began to approach, their
senses became keener and their sensations vivider. Steeled against
surprise, they looked for the unexpected, the strange, the startling;
and the only thing at which they would have wondered would be to be five
minutes without having something new to wonder at. Their excited
imaginations flew far ahead of the Projectile, whose velocity, by the
way, began to be retarded very decidedly by this time, though, of
course, the travellers had as yet no means to become aware of it. The
Moon's size on the sky was meantime getting larger and larger; her
apparent distance was growing shorter and shorter, until at last they
could almost imagine that by putting their hands out they could nearly
touch her.

Next morning, December 5th, all were up and dressed at a very early
hour. This was to be the last day of their journey, if all calculations
were correct. That very night, at 12 o'clock, within nineteen hours at
furthest, at the very moment of Full Moon, they were to reach her
resplendent surface. At that hour was to be completed the most
extraordinary journey ever undertaken by man in ancient or modern times.
Naturally enough, therefore, they found themselves unable to sleep after
four o'clock in the morning; peering upwards through the windows now
visibly glittering under the rays of the Moon, they spent some very
exciting hours in gazing at her slowly enlarging disc, and shouting at
her with confident and joyful hurrahs.

The majestic Queen of the Stars had now risen so high in the spangled
heavens that she could hardly rise higher. In a few degrees more she
would reach the exact point of space where her junction with the
Projectile was to be effected. According to his own observations,
Barbican calculated that they should strike her in the northern
hemisphere, where her plains, or _seas_ as they are called, are immense,
and her mountains are comparatively rare. This, of course, would be so
much the more favorable, if, as was to be apprehended, the lunar
atmosphere was confined exclusively to the low lands.

"Besides," as Ardan observed, "a plain is a more suitable landing place
than a mountain. A Selenite deposited on the top of Mount Everest or
even on Mont Blanc, could hardly be considered, in strict language, to
have arrived on Earth."

"Not to talk," added M'Nicholl, "of the comfort of the thing! When you
land on a plain, there you are. When you land on a peak or on a steep
mountain side, where are you? Tumbling over an embankment with the train
going forty miles an hour, would be nothing to it."

"Therefore, Captain Barbican," cried the Frenchman, "as we should like
to appear before the Selenites in full skins, please land us in the snug
though unromantic North. We shall have time enough to break our necks in
the South."

Barbican made no reply to his companions, because a new reflection had
begun to trouble him, to talk about which would have done no good. There
was certainly something wrong. The Projectile was evidently heading
towards the northern hemisphere of the Moon. What did this prove?
Clearly, a deviation resulting from some cause. The bullet, lodged,
aimed, and fired with the most careful mathematical precision, had been
calculated to reach the very centre of the Moon's disc. Clearly it was
not going to the centre now. What could have produced the deviation?
This Barbican could not tell; nor could he even determine its extent,
having no points of sight by which to make his observations. For the
present he tried to console himself with the hope that the deviation of
the Projectile would be followed by no worse consequence than carrying
them towards the northern border of the Moon, where for several reasons
it would be comparatively easier to alight. Carefully avoiding,
therefore, the use of any expression which might needlessly alarm his
companions, he continued to observe the Moon as carefully as he could,
hoping every moment to find some grounds for believing that the
deviation from the centre was only a slight one. He almost shuddered at
the thought of what would be their situation, if the bullet, missing its
aim, should pass the Moon, and plunge into the interplanetary space
beyond it.

As he continued to gaze, the Moon, instead of presenting the usual
flatness of her disc, began decidedly to show a surface somewhat convex.
Had the Sun been shining on her obliquely, the shadows would have
certainly thrown the great mountains into strong relief. The eye could
then bury itself deep in the yawning chasms of the craters, and easily
follow the cracks, streaks, and ridges which stripe, flecker, and bar
the immensity of her plains. But for the present all relief was lost in
the dazzling glare. The Captain could hardly distinguish even those dark
spots that impart to the full Moon some resemblance to the human face.

"Face!" cried Ardan: "well, a very fanciful eye may detect a face,
though, for the sake of Apollo's beauteous sister, I regret to say, a
terribly pockmarked one!"

The travellers, now evidently approaching the end of their journey,
observed the rapidly increasing world above them with newer and greater
curiosity every moment. Their fancies enkindled at the sight of the new
and strange scenes dimly presented to their view. In imagination they
climbed to the summit of this lofty peak. They let themselves down to
the abyss of that yawning crater. Here they imagined they saw vast seas
hardly kept in their basins by a rarefied atmosphere; there they thought
they could trace mighty rivers bearing to vast oceans the tribute of the
snowy mountains. In the first promptings of their eager curiosity, they
peered greedily into her cavernous depths, and almost expected, amidst
the deathlike hush of inaudible nature, to surprise some sound from the
mystic orb floating up there in eternal silence through a boundless
ocean of never ending vacuum.

This last day of their journey left their memories stored with thrilling
recollections. They took careful note of the slightest details. As they
neared their destination, they felt themselves invaded by a vague,
undefined restlessness. But this restlessness would have given way to
decided uneasiness, if they had known at what a slow rate they were
travelling. They would have surely concluded that their present velocity
would never be able to take them as far as the neutral point, not to
talk of passing it. The reason of such considerable retardation was,
that by this time the Projectile had reached such a great distance from
the Earth that it had hardly any weight. But even this weight, such as
it was, was to be diminished still further, and finally, to vanish
altogether as soon as the bullet reached the neutral point, where the
two attractions, terrestrial and lunar, should counteract each other
with new and surprising effects.

Notwithstanding the absorbing nature of his observations, Ardan never
forgot to prepare breakfast with his usual punctuality. It was eaten
readily and relished heartily. Nothing could be more exquisite than his
calf's foot jelly liquefied and prepared by gas heat, except perhaps his
meat biscuits of preserved Texas beef and Southdown mutton. A bottle of
Château Yquem and another of Clos de Vougeot, both of superlative
excellence in quality and flavor, crowned the repast. Their vicinity to
the Moon and their incessant glancing at her surface did not prevent the
travellers from touching each other's glasses merrily and often. Ardan
took occasion to remark that the lunar vineyards--if any existed--must
be magnificent, considering the intense solar heat they continually
experienced. Not that he counted on them too confidently, for he told
his friends that to provide for the worst he had supplied himself with a
few cases of the best vintages of Médoc and the Côte d'Or, of which the
bottles, then under discussion, might be taken as very favorable
specimens.

The Reiset and Regnault apparatus for purifying the air worked
splendidly, and maintained the atmosphere in a perfectly sanitary
condition. Not an atom of carbonic acid could resist the caustic potash;
and as for the oxygen, according to M'Nicholl's expression, "it was A
prime number one!"

The small quantity of watery vapor enclosed in the Projectile did no
more harm than serving to temper the dryness of the air: many a splendid
_salon_ in New York, London, or Paris, and many an auditorium, even of
theatre, opera house or Academy of Music, could be considered its
inferior in what concerned its hygienic condition.

To keep it in perfect working order, the apparatus should be carefully
attended to. This, Ardan looked on as his own peculiar occupation. He
was never tired regulating the tubes, trying the taps, and testing the
heat of the gas by the pyrometer. So far everything had worked
satisfactorily, and the travellers, following the example of their
friend Marston on a previous occasion, began to get so stout that their
own mothers would not know them in another month, should their
imprisonment last so long. Ardan said they all looked so sleek and
thriving that he was reminded forcibly of a nice lot of pigs fattening
in a pen for a country fair. But how long was this good fortune of
theirs going to last?

Whenever they took their eyes off the Moon, they could not help noticing
that they were still attended outside by the spectre of Satellite's
corpse and by the other refuse of the Projectile. An occasional
melancholy howl also attested Diana's recognition of her companion's
unhappy fate. The travellers saw with surprise that these waifs still
seemed perfectly motionless in space, and kept their respective
distances apart as mathematically as if they had been fastened with
nails to a stone wall.

"I tell you what, dear boys;" observed Ardan, commenting on this curious
phenomenon; "if the concussion had been a little too violent for one of
us that night, his survivors would have been seriously embarrassed in
trying to get rid of his remains. With no earth to cover him up, no sea
to plunge him into, his corpse would never disappear from view, but
would pursue us day and night, grim and ghastly like an avenging ghost!"

"Ugh!" said the Captain, shuddering at the idea.

"But, by the bye, Barbican!" cried the Frenchman, dropping the subject
with his usual abruptness; "you have forgotten something else! Why
didn't you bring a scaphander and an air pump? I could then venture out
of the Projectile as readily and as safely as the diver leaves his boat
and walks about on the bottom of the river! What fun to float in the
midst of that mysterious ether! to steep myself, aye, actually to revel
in the pure rays of the glorious sun! I should have ventured out on the
very point of the Projectile, and there I should have danced and
postured and kicked and bobbed and capered in a style that Taglioni
never dreamed of!"

"Shouldn't I like to see you!" cried the Captain grimly, smiling at the
idea.

"You would not see him long!" observed Barbican quietly. "The air
confined in his body, freed from external pressure, would burst him like
a shell, or like a balloon that suddenly rises to too great a height in
the air! A scaphander would have been a fatal gift. Don't regret its
absence, friend Michael; never forget this axiom: _As long as we are
floating in empty space, the only spot where safety is possible is
inside the Projectile!_"

The words "possible" and "impossible" always grated on Ardan's ears. If
he had been a lexicographer, he would have rigidly excluded them from
his dictionary, both as meaningless and useless. He was preparing an
answer for Barbican, when he was cut out by a sudden observation from
M'Nicholl.

"See here, friends!" cried the Captain; "this going to the Moon is all
very well, but how shall we get back?"

His listeners looked at each other with a surprised and perplexed air.
The question, though a very natural one, now appeared to have presented
itself to their consideration absolutely for the first time.

"What do you mean by such a question, Captain?" asked Barbican in a
grave judicial tone.

"Mac, my boy," said Ardan seriously, "don't it strike you as a little
out of order to ask how you are to return when you have not got there
yet?"

"I don't ask the question with any idea of backing out," observed the
Captain quietly; "as a matter of purely scientific inquiry, I repeat my
question: how are we to return?"

"I don't know," replied Barbican promptly.

"For my part," said Ardan; "if I had known how to get back, I should
have never come at all!"

"Well! of all the answers!" said the Captain, lifting his hands and
shaking his head.

"The best under the circumstances;" observed Barbican; "and I shall
further observe that such a question as yours at present is both useless
and uncalled for. On some future occasion, when we shall consider it
advisable to return, the question will be in order, and we shall discuss
it with all the attention it deserves. Though the Columbiad is at Stony
Hill, the Projectile will still be in the Moon."

"Much we shall gain by that! A bullet without a gun!"

"The gun we can make and the powder too!" replied Barbican confidently.
"Metal and sulphur and charcoal and saltpetre are likely enough to be
present in sufficient quantities beneath the Moon's surface. Besides, to
return is a problem of comparatively easy solution: we should have to
overcome the lunar attraction only--a slight matter--the rest of the
business would be readily done by gravity."

"Enough said on the subject!" exclaimed Ardan curtly; "how to get back
is indefinitely postponed! How to communicate with our friends on the
Earth, is another matter, and, as it seems to me, an extremely easy
one."

"Let us hear the very easy means by which you propose to communicate
with our friends on Earth," asked the Captain, with a sneer, for he was
by this time a little out of humor.

"By means of bolides ejected from the lunar volcanoes," replied the
Frenchman without an instant's hesitation.

"Well said, friend Ardan," exclaimed Barbican. "I am quite disposed to
acknowledge the feasibility of your plan. Laplace has calculated that a
force five times greater than that of an ordinary cannon would be
sufficient to send a bolide from the Moon to the Earth. Now there is no
cannon that can vie in force with even the smallest volcano."

"Hurrah!" cried Ardan, delighted at his success; "just imagine the
pleasure of sending our letters postage free! But--oh! what a splendid
idea!--Dolts that we were for not thinking of it sooner!"

"Let us have the splendid idea!" cried the Captain, with some of his old
acrimony.

"Why didn't we fasten a wire to the Projectile?" asked Ardan,
triumphantly, "It would have enabled us to exchange telegrams with the
Earth!"

"Ho! ho! ho!" roared the Captain, rapidly recovering his good humor;
"decidedly the best joke of the season! Ha! ha! ha! Of course you have
calculated the weight of a wire 240 thousand miles long?"

"No matter about its weight!" cried the Frenchman impetuously; "we
should have laughed at its weight! We could have tripled the charge of
the Columbiad; we could have quadrupled it!--aye, quintupled it, if
necessary!" he added in tones evidently increasing in loudness and
violence.

"Yes, friend Michael," observed Barbican; "but there is a slight and
unfortunately a fatal defect in your project. The Earth, by its
rotation, would have wrapped our wire around herself, like thread around
a spool, and dragged us back almost with the speed of lightning!"

"By the Nine gods of Porsena!" cried Ardan, "something is wrong with my
head to-day! My brain is out of joint, and I am making as nice a mess of
things as my friend Marston was ever capable of! By the bye--talking of
Marston--if we never return to the Earth, what is to prevent him from
following us to the Moon?"

"Nothing!" replied Barbican; "he is a faithful friend and a reliable
comrade. Besides, what is easier? Is not the Columbiad still at Stony
Hill? Cannot gun-cotton be readily manufactured on any occasion? Will
not the Moon again pass through the zenith of Florida? Eighteen years
from now, will she not occupy exactly the same spot that she does
to-day?"

"Certainly!" cried Ardan, with increasing enthusiasm, "Marston will
come! and Elphinstone of the torpedo! and the gallant Bloomsbury, and
Billsby the brave, and all our friends of the Baltimore Gun Club! And we
shall receive them with all the honors! And then we shall establish
projectile trains between the Earth and the Moon! Hurrah for J.T.
Marston!"

"Hurrah for Secretary Marston!" cried the Captain, with an enthusiasm
almost equal to Ardan's.

"Hurrah for my dear friend Marston!" cried Barbican, hardly less
excited than his comrades.

Our old acquaintance, Marston, of course could not have heard the joyous
acclamations that welcomed his name, but at that moment he certainly
must have felt his ears most unaccountably tingling. What was he doing
at the time? He was rattling along the banks of the Kansas River, as
fast as an express train could take him, on the road to Long's Peak,
where, by means of the great Telescope, he expected to find some traces
of the Projectile that contained his friends. He never forgot them for a
moment, but of course he little dreamed that his name at that very time
was exciting their vividest recollections and their warmest applause.

In fact, their recollections were rather too vivid, and their applause
decidedly too warm. Was not the animation that prevailed among the
guests of the Projectile of a very unusual character, and was it not
becoming more and more violent every moment? Could the wine have caused
it? No; though not teetotallers, they never drank to excess. Could the
Moon's proximity, shedding her subtle, mysterious influence over their
nervous systems, have stimulated them to a degree that was threatening
to border on frenzy? Their faces were as red as if they were standing
before a hot fire; their breathing was loud, and their lungs heaved like
a smith's bellows; their eyes blazed like burning coals; their voices
sounded as loud and harsh as that of a stump speaker trying to make
himself heard by an inattentive or hostile crowd; their words popped
from their lips like corks from Champagne bottles; their gesticulating
became wilder and in fact more alarming--considering the little room
left in the Projectile for muscular displays of any kind.

But the most extraordinary part of the whole phenomenon was that neither
of them, not even Barbican, had the slightest consciousness of any
strange or unusual ebullition of spirits either on his own part or on
that of the others.

"See here, gentlemen!" said the Captain in a quick imperious manner--the
roughness of his old life on the Mississippi would still break out--"See
here, gentlemen! It seems I'm not to know if we are to return from the
Moon. Well!--Pass that for the present! But there is one thing I _must_
know!"

"Hear! hear the Captain!" cried Barbican, stamping with his foot, like
an excited fencing master. "There is one thing he _must_ know!"

"I want to know what we're going to do when we get there!"

"He wants to know what we're going to do when we get there! A sensible
question! Answer it, Ardan!"

"Answer it yourself, Barbican! You know more about the Moon than I do!
You know more about it than all the Nasmyths that ever lived!"

"I'm blessed if I know anything at all about it!" cried Barbican, with a
joyous laugh. "Ha, ha, ha! The first eastern shore Marylander or any
other simpleton you meet in Baltimore, knows as much about the Moon as
I do! Why we're going there, I can't tell! What we're going to do when
we get there, can't tell either! Ardan knows all about it! He can tell!
He's taking us there!"

"Certainly I can tell! should I have offered to take you there without a
good object in view?" cried Ardan, husky with continual roaring. "Answer
me that!"

"No conundrums!" cried the Captain, in a voice sourer and rougher than
ever; "tell us if you can in plain English, what the demon we have come
here for!"

"I'll tell you if I feel like it," cried Ardan, folding his arms with an
aspect of great dignity; "and I'll not tell you if I don't feel like
it!"

"What's that?" cried Barbican. "You'll not give us an answer when we ask
you a reasonable question?"

"Never!" cried Ardan, with great determination. "I'll never answer a
question reasonable or unreasonable, unless it is asked in a proper
manner!"

"None of your French airs here!" exclaimed M'Nicholl, by this time
almost completely out of himself between anger and excitement. "I don't
know where I am; I don't know where I'm going; I don't know why I'm
going; _you_ know all about it, Ardan, or at least you think you do!
Well then, give me a plain answer to a plain question, or by the
Thirty-eight States of our glorious Union, I shall know what for!"

"Listen, Ardan!" cried Barbican, grappling with the Frenchman, and with
some difficulty restraining him from flying at M'Nicholl's throat; "You
ought to tell him! It is only your duty! One day you found us both in
St. Helena woods, where we had no more idea of going to the Moon than of
sailing to the South Pole! There you twisted us both around your finger,
and induced us to follow you blindly on the most formidable journey ever
undertaken by man! And now you refuse to tell us what it was all for!"

"I don't refuse, dear old Barbican! To you, at least, I can't refuse
anything!" cried Ardan, seizing his friend's hands and wringing them
violently. Then letting them go and suddenly starting back, "you wish to
know," he continued in resounding tones, "why we have followed out the
grandest idea that ever set a human brain on fire! Why we have
undertaken a journey that for length, danger, and novelty, for
fascinating, soul-stirring and delirious sensations, for all that can
attract man's burning heart, and satisfy the intensest cravings of his
intellect, far surpasses the vividest realities of Dante's passionate
dream! Well, I will tell you! It is to annex another World to the New
One! It is to take possession of the Moon in the name of the United
States of America! It is to add a thirty-ninth State to the glorious
Union! It is to colonize the lunar regions, to cultivate them, to people
them, to transport to them some of our wonders of art, science, and
industry! It is to civilize the Selenites, unless they are more
civilized already than we are ourselves! It is to make them all good
Republicans, if they are not so already!"

"Provided, of course, that there are Selenites in existence!" sneered
the Captain, now sourer than ever, and in his unaccountable excitement
doubly irritating.

"Who says there are no Selenites?" cried Ardan fiercely, with fists
clenched and brows contracted.

"I do!" cried M'Nicholl stoutly; "I deny the existence of anything of
the kind, and I denounce every one that maintains any such whim as a
visionary, if not a fool!"

Ardan's reply to this taunt was a desperate facer, which, however,
Barbican managed to stop while on its way towards the Captain's nose.
M'Nicholl, seeing himself struck at, immediately assumed such a posture
of defence as showed him to be no novice at the business. A battle
seemed unavoidable; but even at this trying moment Barbican showed
himself equal to the emergency.

"Stop, you crazy fellows! you ninnyhammers! you overgrown babies!" he
exclaimed, seizing his companions by the collar, and violently swinging
them around with his vast strength until they stood back to back; "what
are you going to fight about? Suppose there are Lunarians in the Moon!
Is that a reason why there should be Lunatics in the Projectile! But,
Ardan, why do you insist on Lunarians? Are we so shiftless that we can't
do without them when we get to the Moon?"

"I don't insist on them!" cried Ardan, who submitted to Barbican like a
child. "Hang the Lunarians! Certainly, we can do without them! What do I
care for them? Down with them!"

"Yes, down with the Lunarians!" cried M'Nicholl as spitefully as if he
had even the slightest belief in their existence.

"We shall take possession of the Moon ourselves!" cried Ardan.
"Lunarians or no Lunarians!"

"We three shall constitute a Republic!" cried M'Nicholl.

"I shall be the House!" cried Ardan.

"And I the Senate!" answered the Captain.

"And Barbican our first President!" shrieked the Frenchman.

"Our first and last!" roared M'Nicholl.

"No objections to a third term!" yelled Ardan.

"He's welcome to any number of terms he pleases!" vociferated M'Nicholl.

"Hurrah for President Barbican of the Lunatic--I mean of the Lunar
Republic!" screamed Ardan.

"Long may he wave, and may his shadow never grow less!" shouted Captain
M'Nicholl, his eyes almost out of their sockets.

Then with voices reminding you of sand fiercely blown against the window
panes, the _President_ and the _Senate_ chanted the immortal _Yankee
Doodle_, whilst the _House_ delivered itself of the _Marseillaise_, in a
style which even the wildest Jacobins in Robespierre's day could hardly
have surpassed.

But long before either song was ended, all three broke out into a
dance, wild, insensate, furious, delirious, paroxysmatical. No Orphic
festivals on Mount Cithaeron ever raged more wildly. No Bacchic revels
on Mount Parnassus were ever more corybantic. Diana, demented by the
maddening example, joined in the orgie, howling and barking frantically
in her turn, and wildly jumping as high as the ceiling of the
Projectile. Then came new accessions to the infernal din. Wings suddenly
began to flutter, cocks to crow, hens to cluck; and five or six
chickens, managing to escape out of their coop, flew backwards and
forwards blindly, with frightened screams, dashing against each other
and against the walls of the Projectile, and altogether getting up as
demoniacal a hullabaloo as could be made by ten thousand bats that you
suddenly disturbed in a cavern where they had slept through the winter.

Then the three companions, no longer able to withstand the overpowering
influence of the mysterious force that mastered them, intoxicated, more
than drunk, burned by the air that scorched their organs of respiration,
dropped at last, and lay flat, motionless, senseless as dabs of clay, on
the floor of the Projectile.

[Illustration: A DEMONIACAL HULLABALOO.]




CHAPTER VIII.

THE NEUTRAL POINT.


What had taken place? Whence proceeded this strange intoxication whose
consequences might have proved so disastrous? A little forgetfulness on
Ardan's part had done the whole mischief, but fortunately M'Nicholl was
able to remedy it in time.

After a regular fainting spell several minutes long, the Captain was the
first man to return to consciousness and the full recovery of his
intellectual faculties. His first feelings were far from pleasant. His
stomach gnawed him as if he had not eaten for a week, though he had
taken breakfast only a few hours before; his eyes were dim, his brain
throbbing, and his limbs shaking. In short, he presented every symptom
usually seen in a man dying of starvation. Picking himself up with much
care and difficulty, he roared out to Ardan for something to eat. Seeing
that the Frenchman was unable or unwilling to respond, he concluded to
help himself, by beginning first of all to prepare a little tea. To do
this, fire was necessary; so, to light his lamp, he struck a match.

But what was his surprise at seeing the sulphur tip of the match blazing
with a light so bright and dazzling that his eyes could hardly bear it!
Touching it to the gas burner, a stream of light flashed forth equal in
its intensity to the flame of an electric lamp. Then he understood it
all in an instant. The dazzling glare, his maddened brain, his gnawing
stomach--all were now clear as the noon-day Sun.

"The oxygen!" he cried, and, suddenly stooping down and examining the
tap of the air apparatus, he saw that it had been only half turned off.
Consequently the air was gradually getting more and more impregnated
with this powerful gas, colorless, odorless, tasteless, infinitely
precious, but, unless when strongly diluted with nitrogen, capable of
producing fatal disorders in the human system. Ardan, startled by
M'Nicholl's question about the means of returning from the Moon, had
turned the cock only half off.

The Captain instantly stopped the escape of the oxygen, but not one
moment too soon. It had completely saturated the atmosphere. A few
minutes more and it would have killed the travellers, not like carbonic
acid, by smothering them, but by burning them up, as a strong draught
burns up the coals in a stove.

[Illustration: "THE OXYGEN!" HE CRIED.]

It took nearly an hour for the air to become pure enough to allow the
lungs their natural play. Slowly and by degrees, the travellers
recovered from their intoxication; they had actually to sleep off the
fumes of the oxygen as a drunkard has to sleep off the effects of his
brandy. When Ardan learned that he was responsible for the whole
trouble, do you think the information disconcerted him? Not a bit of it.
On the contrary, he was rather proud of having done something
startling, to break the monotony of the journey; and to put a little
life, as he said, into old Barbican and the grim Captain, so as to get a
little fun out of such grave philosophers.

After laughing heartily at the comical figure cut by his two friends
capering like crazy students at the _Closerie des Lilas_, he went on
moralizing on the incident:

"For my part, I'm not a bit sorry for having partaken of this fuddling
gas. It gives me an idea, dear boys. Would it not be worth some
enterprising fellow's while to establish a sanatorium provided with
oxygen chambers, where people of a debilitated state of health could
enjoy a few hours of intensely active existence! There's money in it, as
you Americans say. Just suppose balls or parties given in halls where
the air would be provided with an extra supply of this enrapturing gas!
Or, theatres where the atmosphere would be maintained in a highly
oxygenated condition. What passion, what fire in the actors! What
enthusiasm in the spectators! And, carrying the idea a little further,
if, instead of an assembly or an audience, we should oxygenize towns,
cities, a whole country--what activity would be infused into the whole
people! What new life would electrify a stagnant community! Out of an
old used-up nation we could perhaps make a bran-new one, and, for my
part, I know more than one state in old Europe where this oxygen
experiment might be attended with a decided advantage, or where, at all
events, it could do no harm!"

The Frenchman spoke so glibly and gesticulated so earnestly that
M'Nicholl once more gravely examined the stop-cock; but Barbican damped
his enthusiasm by a single observation.

"Friend Michael," said he, "your new and interesting idea we shall
discuss at a more favorable opportunity. At present we want to know
where all these cocks and hens have come from."

"These cocks and hens?"

"Yes."

Ardan threw a glance of comical bewilderment on half a dozen or so of
splendid barn-yard fowls that were now beginning to recover from the
effects of the oxygen. For an instant he could not utter a word; then,
shrugging his shoulders, he muttered in a low voice:

"Catastrophe prematurely exploded!"

"What are you going to do with these chickens?" persisted Barbican.

"Acclimatize them in the Moon, by Jove! what else?" was the ready reply.

"Why conceal them then?"

"A hoax, a poor hoax, dear President, which proves a miserable failure!
I intended to let them loose on the Lunar Continent at the first
favorable opportunity. I often had a good laugh to myself, thinking of
your astonishment and the Captain's at seeing a lot of American poultry
scratching for worms on a Lunar dunghill!"

"Ah! wag, jester, incorrigible _farceur_!" cried Barbican with a smile;
"you want no nitrous oxide to put a bee in your bonnet! He is always as
bad as you and I were for a short time, M'Nicholl, under the laughing
gas! He's never had a sensible moment in his life!"

"I can't say the same of you," replied Ardan; "you had at least one
sensible moment in all your lives, and that was about an hour ago!"

Their incessant chattering did not prevent the friends from at once
repairing the disorder of the interior of the Projectile. Cocks and hens
were put back in their cages. But while doing so, the friends were
astonished to find that the birds, though good sized creatures, and now
pretty fat and plump, hardly felt heavier in their hands than if they
had been so many sparrows. This drew their interested attention to a new
phenomenon.

From the moment they had left the Earth, their own weight, and that of
the Projectile and the objects therein contained, had been undergoing a
progressive diminution. They might never be able to ascertain this fact
with regard to the Projectile, but the moment was now rapidly
approaching when the loss of weight would become perfectly sensible,
both regarding themselves and the tools and instruments surrounding
them. Of course, it is quite clear, that this decrease could not be
indicated by an ordinary scales, as the weight to balance the object
would have lost precisely as much as the object itself. But a spring
balance, for instance, in which the tension of the coil is independent
of attraction, would have readily given the exact equivalent of the
loss.

Attraction or weight, according to Newton's well known law, acting in
direct proportion to the mass of the attracting body and in inverse
proportion to the square of the distance, this consequence clearly
follows: Had the Earth been alone in space, or had the other heavenly
bodies been suddenly annihilated, the further from the Earth the
Projectile would be, the less weight it would have. However, it would
never _entirely_ lose its weight, as the terrestrial attraction would
have always made itself felt at no matter what distance. But as the
Earth is not the only celestial body possessing attraction, it is
evident that there may be a point in space where the respective
attractions may be entirely annihilated by mutual counteraction. Of this
phenomenon the present instance was a case in point. In a short time,
the Projectile and its contents would for a few moments be absolutely
and completely deprived of all weight whatsoever.

The path described by the Projectile was evidently a line from the Earth
to the Moon averaging somewhat less than 240,000 miles in length.
According as the distance between the Projectile and the Earth was
increasing, the terrestrial attraction was diminishing in the ratio of
the square of the distance, and the lunar attraction was augmenting in
the same proportion.

As before observed, the point was not now far off where, the two
attractions counteracting each other, the bullet would actually weigh
nothing at all. If the masses of the Earth and the Moon had been equal,
this should evidently be found half way between the two bodies. But by
making allowance for the difference of the respective masses, it was
easy to calculate that this point would be situated at the 9/10 of the
total distance, or, in round numbers, at something less than 216,000
miles from the Earth.

At this point, a body that possessed no energy or principle of movement
within itself, would remain forever, relatively motionless, suspended
like Mahomet's coffin, being equally attracted by the two orbs and
nothing impelling it in one direction rather than in the other.

Now the Projectile at this moment was nearing this point; if it reached
it, what would be the consequence?

To this question three answers presented themselves, all possible under
the circumstances, but very different in their results.

1. Suppose the Projectile to possess velocity enough to pass the neutral
point. In such case, it would undoubtedly proceed onward to the Moon,
being drawn thither by Lunar attraction.

2. Suppose it lacked the requisite velocity for reaching the neutral
point. In such a case it would just as certainly fall back to the Earth,
in obedience to the law of Terrestrial attraction.

3. Suppose it to be animated by just sufficient velocity to reach the
neutral point, but not to pass it. In that case, the Projectile would
remain forever in the same spot, perfectly motionless as far as regards
the Earth and the Moon, though of course following them both in their
annual orbits round the Sun.

Such was now the state of things, which Barbican tried to explain to his
friends, who, it need hardly be said, listened to his remarks with the
most intense interest. How were they to know, they asked him, the
precise instant at which the Projectile would reach the neutral point?
That would be an easy matter, he assured them. It would be at the very
moment when both themselves and all the other objects contained in the
Projectile would be completely free from every operation of the law of
gravity; in other words, when everything would cease to have weight.

This gradual diminution of the action of gravity, the travellers had
been for some time noticing, but they had not yet witnessed its total
cessation. But that very morning, about an hour before noon, as the
Captain was making some little experiment in Chemistry, he happened by
accident to overturn a glass full of water. What was his surprise at
seeing that neither the glass nor the water fell to the floor! Both
remained suspended in the air almost completely motionless.

"The prettiest experiment I ever saw!" cried Ardan; "let us have more of
it!"

And seizing the bottles, the arms, and the other objects in the
Projectile, he arranged them around each other in the air with some
regard to symmetry and proportion. The different articles, keeping
strictly each in its own place, formed a very attractive group wonderful
to behold. Diana, placed in the apex of the pyramid, would remind you of
those marvellous suspensions in the air performed by Houdin, Herman, and
a few other first class wizards. Only being kept in her place without
being hampered by invisible strings, the animal rather seemed to enjoy
the exhibition, though in all probability she was hardly conscious of
any thing unusual in her appearance.

Our travellers had been fully prepared for such a phenomenon, yet it
struck them with as much surprise as if they had never uttered a
scientific reason to account for it. They saw that, no longer subject to
the ordinary laws of nature, they were now entering the realms of the
marvellous. They felt that their bodies were absolutely without weight.
Their arms, fully extended, no longer sought their sides. Their heads
oscillated unsteadily on their shoulders. Their feet no longer rested on
the floor. In their efforts to hold themselves straight, they looked
like drunken men trying to maintain the perpendicular. We have all read
stories of some men deprived of the power of reflecting light and of
others who could not cast a shadow. But here reality, no fantastic
story, showed you men who, through the counteraction of attractive
forces, could tell no difference between light substances and heavy
substances, and who absolutely had no weight whatever themselves!

"Let us take graceful attitudes!" cried Ardan, "and imagine we are
playing _tableaux_! Let us, for instance, form a grand historical group
of the three great goddesses of the nineteenth century. Barbican will
represent Minerva or _Science_; the Captain, Bellona or _War_; while I,
as Madre Natura, the newly born goddess of _Progress_, floating
gracefully over you both, extend my hands so, fondly patronizing the
one, but grandly ordering off the other, to the regions of eternal
night! More on your toe, Captain! Your right foot a little higher! Look
at Barbican's admirable pose! Now then, prepare to receive orders for a
new tableau! Form group _à la Jardin Mabille!_ Presto! Change!"

In an instant, our travellers, changing attitudes, formed the new group
with tolerable success. Even Barbican, who had been to Paris in his
youth, yielding for a moment to the humor of the thing, acted the _naif
Anglais_ to the life. The Captain was frisky enough to remind you of a
middle-aged Frenchman from the provinces, on a hasty visit to the
capital for a few days' fun. Ardan was in raptures.

"Oh! if Raphael could only see us!" he exclaimed in a kind of ecstasy.
"He would paint such a picture as would throw all his other masterpieces
in the shade!"

"Knock spots out of the best of them by fifty per cent!" cried the
Captain, gesticulating well enough _à l'étudiant_, but rather mixing his
metaphors.

[Illustration: A GROUP _A LA JARDIN MABILLE_.]

"He should be pretty quick in getting through the job," observed
Barbican, the first as usual to recover tranquillity. "As soon as the
Projectile will have passed the neutral point--in half an hour at
longest--lunar attraction will draw us to the Moon."

"We shall have to crawl on the ceiling then like flies," said Ardan.

"Not at all," said the Captain; "the Projectile, having its centre of
gravity very low, will turn upside down by degrees."

"Upside down!" cried Ardan. "That will be a nice mess! everything
higgledy-piggledy!"

"No danger, friend Michael," said M'Nicholl; "there shall be no disorder
whatever; nothing will quit its place; the movement of the Projectile
will be effected by such slow degrees as to be imperceptible."

"Yes," added Barbican, "as soon as we shall have passed the neutral
point, the base of the Projectile, its heaviest part, will swing around
gradually until it faces the Moon. Before this phenomenon, however, can
take place, we must of course cross the line."

"Cross the line!" cried the Frenchman; "then let us imitate the sailors
when they do the same thing in the Atlantic Ocean! Splice the main
brace!"

A slight effort carried him sailing over to the side of the Projectile.
Opening a cupboard and taking out a bottle and a few glasses, he placed
them on a tray. Then setting the tray itself in the air as on a table in
front of his companions, he filled the glasses, passed them around, and,
in a lively speech interrupted with many a joyous hurrah, congratulated
his companions on their glorious achievement in being the first that
ever crossed the lunar line.

This counteracting influence of the attractions lasted nearly an hour.
By that time the travellers could keep themselves on the floor without
much effort. Barbican also made his companions remark that the conical
point of the Projectile diverged a little from the direct line to the
Moon, while by an inverse movement, as they could notice through the
window of the floor, the base was gradually turning away from the Earth.
The Lunar attraction was evidently getting the better of the
Terrestrial. The fall towards the Moon, though still almost insensible,
was certainly beginning.

It could not be more than the eightieth part of an inch in the first
second. But by degrees, as the attractive force would increase, the fall
would be more decided, and the Projectile, overbalanced by its base, and
presenting its cone to the Earth, would descend with accelerated
velocity to the Lunar surface. The object of their daring attempt would
then be successfully attained. No further obstacle, therefore, being
likely to stand in the way of the complete success of the enterprise,
the Captain and the Frenchman cordially shook hands with Barbican, all
kept congratulating each other on their good fortune as long as the
bottle lasted.

They could not talk enough about the wonderful phenomenon lately
witnessed; the chief point, the neutralization of the law of gravity,
particularly, supplied them with an inexhaustible subject. The
Frenchman, as usual, as enthusiastic in his fancy, as he was fanciful in
his enthusiasm, got off some characteristic remarks.

"What a fine thing it would be, my boys," he exclaimed, "if on Earth we
could be so fortunate as we have been here, and get rid of that weight
that keeps us down like lead, that rivets us to it like an adamantine
chain! Then should we prisoners become free! Adieu forever to all
weariness of arms or feet! At present, in order to fly over the surface
of the Earth by the simple exertion of our muscles or even to sustain
ourselves in the air, we require a muscular force fifty times greater
than we possess; but if attraction did not exist, the simplest act of
the will, our slightest whim even, would be sufficient to transport us
to whatever part of space we wished to visit."

"Ardan, you had better invent something to kill attraction," observed
M'Nicholl drily; "you can do it if you try. Jackson and Morton have
killed pain by sulphuric ether. Suppose you try your hand on
attraction!"

"It would be worth a trial!" cried Ardan, so full of his subject as not
to notice the Captain's jeering tone; "attraction once destroyed, there
is an end forever to all loads, packs and burdens! How the poor omnibus
horses would rejoice! Adieu forever to all cranes, derricks, capstans,
jack-screws, and even hotel-elevators! We could dispense with all
ladders, door steps, and even stair-cases!"

"And with all houses too," interrupted Barbican; "or, at least, we
_should_ dispense with them because we could not have them. If there was
no weight, you could neither make a wall of bricks nor cover your house
with a roof. Even your hat would not stay on your head. The cars would
not stay on the railway nor the boats on the water. What do I say? We
could not have any water. Even the Ocean would leave its bed and float
away into space. Nay, the atmosphere itself would leave us, being
detained in its place by terrestrial attraction and by nothing else."

"Too true, Mr. President," replied Ardan after a pause. "It's a fact. I
acknowledge the corn, as Marston says. But how you positive fellows do
knock holes into our pretty little creations of fancy!"

"Don't feel so bad about it, Ardan;" observed M'Nicholl; "though there
may be no orb from which gravity is excluded altogether, we shall soon
land in one, where it is much less powerful than on the Earth."

"You mean the Moon!"

"Yes, the Moon. Her mass being 1/89 of the Earth's, her attractive power
should be in the same proportion; that is, a boy 10 years old, whose
weight on Earth is about 90 lbs., would weigh on the Moon only about 1
pound, if nothing else were to be taken into consideration. But when
standing on the surface of the Moon, he is relatively 4 times nearer to
the centre than when he is standing on the surface of the Earth. His
weight, therefore, having to be increased by the square of the distance,
must be sixteen times greater. Now 16 times 1/89 being less than 1/5, it
is clear that my weight of 150 pounds will be cut down to nearly 30 as
soon as we reach the Moon's surface."

"And mine?" asked Ardan.

"Yours will hardly reach 25 pounds, I should think," was the reply.

"Shall my muscular strength diminish in the same proportion?" was the
next question.

"On the contrary, it will be relatively so much the more increased that
you can take a stride 15 feet in width as easily as you can now take one
of ordinary length."

"We shall be all Samsons, then, in the Moon!" cried Ardan.

"Especially," replied M'Nicholl, "if the stature of the Selenites is in
proportion to the mass of their globe."

"If so, what should be their height?"

"A tall man would hardly be twelve inches in his boots!"

"They must be veritable Lilliputians then!" cried Ardan; "and we are all
to be Gullivers! The old myth of the Giants realized! Perhaps the Titans
that played such famous parts in the prehistoric period of our Earth,
were adventurers like ourselves, casually arrived from some great
planet!"

"Not from such planets as _Mercury_, _Venus_ or _Mars_ anyhow, friend
Michael," observed Barbican. "But the inhabitants of _Jupiter_,
_Saturn_, _Uranus,_ or _Neptune_, if they bear the same proportion to
their planet that we do ours, must certainly be regular Brobdignagians."

"Let us keep severely away from all planets of the latter class then,"
said Ardan. "I never liked to play the part of Lilliputian myself. But
how about the Sun, Barbican? I always had a hankering after the Sun!"

"The Sun's volume is about 1-1/3 million times greater than that of the
Earth, but his density being only about 1/4, the attraction on his
surface is hardly 30 times greater than that of our globe. Still, every
proportion observed, the inhabitants of the Sun can't be much less than
150 or 160 feet in height."

"_Mille tonnerres!_" cried Ardan, "I should be there like Ulysses among
the Cyclops! I'll tell you what it is, Barbican; if we ever decide on
going to the Sun, we must provide ourselves before hand with a few of
your Rodman's Columbiads to frighten off the Solarians!"

"Your Columbiads would not do great execution there," observed
M'Nicholl; "your bullet would be hardly out of the barrel when it would
drop to the surface like a heavy stone pushed off the wall of a house."

"Oh! I like that!" laughed the incredulous Ardan.

"A little calculation, however, shows the Captain's remark to be
perfectly just," said Barbican. "Rodman's ordinary 15 inch Columbiad
requires a charge of 100 pounds of mammoth powder to throw a ball of
500 pounds weight. What could such a charge do with a ball weighing 30
times as much or 15,000 pounds? Reflect on the enormous weight
everything must have on the surface of the Sun! Your hat, for instance,
would weigh 20 or 30 pounds. Your cigar nearly a pound. In short, your
own weight on the Sun's surface would be so great, more than two tons,
that if you ever fell you should never be able to pick yourself up
again!"

"Yes," added the Captain, "and whenever you wanted to eat or drink you
should rig up a set of powerful machinery to hoist the eatables and
drinkables into your mouth."

"Enough of the Sun to-day, boys!" cried Ardan, shrugging his shoulders;
"I don't contemplate going there at present. Let us be satisfied with
the Moon! There, at least, we shall be of some account!"




CHAPTER IX.

A LITTLE OFF THE TRACK.


Barbican's mind was now completely at rest at least on one subject. The
original force of the discharge had been great enough to send the
Projectile beyond the neutral line. Therefore, there was no longer any
danger of its falling back to the Earth. Therefore, there was no longer
any danger of its resting eternally motionless on the point of the
counteracting attractions. The next subject to engage his attention was
the question: would the Projectile, under the influence of lunar
attraction, succeed in reaching its destination?

The only way in which it _could_ succeed was by falling through a space
of nearly 24,000 miles and then striking the Moon's surface. A most
terrific fall! Even taking the lunar attraction to be only the one-sixth
of the Earth's, such a fall was simply bewildering to think of. The
greatest height to which a balloon ever ascended was seven miles
(Glaisher, 1862). Imagine a fall from even that distance! Then imagine a
fall from a height of four thousand miles!

Yet it was for a fall of this appalling kind on the surface of the Moon
that the travellers had now to prepare themselves. Instead of avoiding
it, however, they eagerly desired it and would be very much
disappointed if they missed it. They had taken the best precautions they
could devise to guard against the terrific shock. These were mainly of
two kinds: one was intended to counteract as much as possible the
fearful results to be expected the instant the Projectile touched the
lunar surface; the other, to retard the velocity of the fall itself, and
thereby to render it less violent.

The best arrangement of the first kind was certainly Barbican's
water-contrivance for counteracting the shock at starting, which has
been so fully described in our former volume. (See _Baltimore Gun Club_,
page 353.) But unfortunately it could be no longer employed. Even if the
partitions were in working order, the water--two thousand pounds in
weight had been required--was no longer to be had. The little still left
in the tanks was of no account for such a purpose. Besides, they had not
a single drop of the precious liquid to spare, for they were as yet
anything but sanguine regarding the facility of finding water on the
Moon's surface.

Fortunately, however, as the gentle reader may remember, Barbican,
besides using water to break the concussion, had provided the movable
disc with stout pillars containing a strong buffing apparatus, intended
to protect it from striking the bottom too violently after the
destruction of the different partitions. These buffers were still good,
and, gravity being as yet almost imperceptible, to put them once more in
order and adjust them to the disc was not a difficult task.

The travellers set to work at once and soon accomplished it. The
different pieces were put together readily--a mere matter of bolts and
screws, with plenty of tools to manage them. In a short time the
repaired disc rested on its steel buffers, like a table on its legs, or
rather like a sofa seat on its springs. The new arrangement was attended
with at least one disadvantage. The bottom light being covered up, a
convenient view of the Moon's surface could not be had as soon as they
should begin to fall in a perpendicular descent. This, however, was only
a slight matter, as the side lights would permit the adventurers to
enjoy quite as favorable a view of the vast regions of the Moon as is
afforded to balloon travellers when looking down on the Earth over the
sides of their car.

The disc arrangement was completed in about an hour, but it was not till
past twelve o'clock before things were restored to their usual order.
Barbican then tried to make fresh observations regarding the inclination
of the Projectile; but to his very decided chagrin he found that it had
not yet turned over sufficiently to commence the perpendicular fall: on
the contrary, it even seemed to be following a curve rather parallel
with that of the lunar disc. The Queen of the Stars now glittered with a
light more dazzling than ever, whilst from an opposite part of the sky
the glorious King of Day flooded her with his fires.

The situation began to look a little serious.

"Shall we ever get there!" asked the Captain.

"Let us be prepared for getting there, any how," was Barbican's dubious
reply.

"You're a pretty pair of suspenders," said Ardan cheerily (he meant of
course doubting hesitators, but his fluent command of English sometimes
led him into such solecisms). "Certainly we shall get there--and perhaps
a little sooner than will be good for us."

This reply sharply recalled Barbican to the task he had undertaken, and
he now went to work seriously, trying to combine arrangements to break
the fall. The reader may perhaps remember Ardan's reply to the Captain
on the day of the famous meeting in Tampa.

"Your fall would be violent enough," the Captain had urged, "to splinter
you like glass into a thousand fragments."

"And what shall prevent me," had been Ardan's ready reply, "from
breaking my fall by means of counteracting rockets suitably disposed,
and let off at the proper time?"

The practical utility of this idea had at once impressed Barbican. It
could hardly be doubted that powerful rockets, fastened on the outside
to the bottom of the Projectile, could, when discharged, considerably
retard the velocity of the fall by their sturdy recoil. They could burn
in a vacuum by means of oxygen furnished by themselves, as powder burns
in the chamber of a gun, or as the volcanoes of the Moon continue their
action regardless of the absence of a lunar atmosphere.

Barbican had therefore provided himself with rockets enclosed in strong
steel gun barrels, grooved on the outside so that they could be screwed
into corresponding holes already made with much care in the bottom of
the Projectile. They were just long enough, when flush with the floor
inside, to project outside by about six inches. They were twenty in
number, and formed two concentric circles around the dead light. Small
holes in the disc gave admission to the wires by which each of the
rockets was to be discharged externally by electricity. The whole effect
was therefore to be confined to the outside. The mixtures having been
already carefully deposited in each barrel, nothing further need be done
than to take away the metallic plugs which had been screwed into the
bottom of the Projectile, and replace them by the rockets, every one of
which was found to fit its grooved chamber with rigid exactness.

This evidently should have been all done before the disc had been
finally laid on its springs. But as this had to be lifted up again in
order to reach the bottom of the Projectile, more work was to be done
than was strictly necessary. Though the labor was not very hard,
considering that gravity had as yet scarcely made itself felt, M'Nicholl
and Ardan were not sorry to have their little joke at Barbican's
expense. The Frenchman began humming

    "_Aliquandoque bonus dormitat Homerus,_"

to a tune from _Orphée aux Enfers_, and the Captain said something
about the Philadelphia Highway Commissioners who pave a street one day,
and tear it up the next to lay the gas pipes. But his friends' humor was
all lost on Barbican, who was so wrapped up in his work that he probably
never heard a word they said.

Towards three o'clock every preparation was made, every possible
precaution taken, and now our bold adventurers had nothing more to do
than watch and wait.

The Projectile was certainly approaching the Moon. It had by this time
turned over considerably under the influence of attraction, but its own
original motion still followed a decidedly oblique direction. The
consequence of these two forces might possibly be a tangent, line
approaching the edge of the Moon's disc. One thing was certain: the
Projectile had not yet commenced to fall directly towards her surface;
its base, in which its centre of gravity lay, was still turned away
considerably from the perpendicular.

Barbican's countenance soon showed perplexity and even alarm. His
Projectile was proving intractable to the laws of gravitation. The
_unknown_ was opening out dimly before him, the great boundless unknown
of the starry plains. In his pride and confidence as a scientist, he had
flattered himself with having sounded the consequence of every possible
hypothesis regarding the Projectile's ultimate fate: the return to the
Earth; the arrival at the Moon; and the motionless dead stop at the
neutral point. But here, a new and incomprehensible fourth hypothesis,
big with the terrors of the mystic infinite, rose up before his
disturbed mind, like a grim and hollow ghost. After a few seconds,
however, he looked at it straight in the face without wincing. His
companions showed themselves just as firm. Whether it was science that
emboldened Barbican, his phlegmatic stoicism that propped up the
Captain, or his enthusiastic vivacity that cheered the irrepressible
Ardan, I cannot exactly say. But certainly they were all soon talking
over the matter as calmly as you or I would discuss the advisability of
taking a sail on the lake some beautiful evening in July.

Their first remarks were decidedly peculiar and quite characteristic.
Other men would have asked themselves where the Projectile was taking
them to. Do you think such a question ever occurred to them? Not a bit
of it. They simply began asking each other what could have been the
cause of this new and strange state of things.

"Off the track, it appears," observed Ardan. "How's that?"

"My opinion is," answered the Captain, "that the Projectile was not
aimed true. Every possible precaution had been taken, I am well aware,
but we all know that an inch, a line, even the tenth part of a hair's
breadth wrong at the start would have sent us thousands of miles off our
course by this time."

"What have you to say to that, Barbican?" asked Ardan.

"I don't think there was any error at the start," was the confident
reply; "not even so much as a line! We took too many tests proving the
absolute perpendicularity of the Columbiad, to entertain the slightest
doubt on that subject. Its direction towards the zenith being
incontestable, I don't see why we should not reach the Moon when she
comes to the zenith."

"Perhaps we're behind time," suggested Ardan.

"What have you to say to that, Barbican?" asked the Captain. "You know
the Cambridge men said the journey had to be done in 97 hours 13 minutes
and 20 seconds. That's as much as to say that if we're not up to time we
shall miss the Moon."

"Correct," said Barbican. "But we _can't_ be behind time. We started,
you know, on December 1st, at 13 minutes and 20 seconds before 11
o'clock, and we were to arrive four days later at midnight precisely.
To-day is December 5th Gentlemen, please examine your watches. It is now
half past three in the afternoon. Eight hours and a half are sufficient
to take us to our journey's end. Why should we not arrive there?"

"How about being ahead of time?" asked the Captain.

"Just so!" said Ardan. "You know we have discovered the initial velocity
to have been greater than was expected."

"Not at all! not at all!" cried Barbican "A slight excess of velocity
would have done no harm whatever had the direction of the Projectile
been perfectly true. No. There must have been a digression. We must have
been switched off!"

"Switched off? By what?" asked both his listeners in one breath.

"I can't tell," said Barbican curtly.

"Well!" said Ardan; "if Barbican can't tell, there is an end to all
further talk on the subject. We're switched off--that's enough for me.
What has done it? I don't care. Where are we going to? I don't care.
What is the use of pestering our brains about it? We shall soon find
out. We are floating around in space, and we shall end by hauling up
somewhere or other."

But in this indifference Barbican was far from participating. Not that
he was not prepared to meet the future with a bold and manly heart. It
was his inability to answer his own question that rendered him uneasy.
What _had_ switched them off? He would have given worlds for an answer,
but his brain sorely puzzled sought one in vain.

In the mean time, the Projectile continued to turn its side rather than
its base towards the Moon; that is, to assume a lateral rather than a
direct movement, and this movement was fully participated in by the
multitude of the objects that had been thrown outside. Barbican could
even convince himself by sighting several points on the lunar surface,
by this time hardly more than fifteen or eighteen thousand miles
distant, that the velocity of the Projectile instead of accelerating was
becoming more and more uniform. This was another proof that there was
no perpendicular fall. However, though the original impulsive force was
still superior to the Moon's attraction, the travellers were evidently
approaching the lunar disc, and there was every reason to hope that they
would at last reach a point where, the lunar attraction at last having
the best of it, a decided fall should be the result.

The three friends, it need hardly be said, continued to make their
observations with redoubled interest, if redoubled interest were
possible. But with all their care they could as yet determine nothing
regarding the topographical details of our radiant satellite. Her
surface still reflected the solar rays too dazzlingly to show the relief
necessary for satisfactory observation.

Our travellers kept steadily on the watch looking out of the side
lights, till eight o'clock in the evening, by which time the Moon had
grown so large in their eyes that she covered up fully half the sky. At
this time the Projectile itself must have looked like a streak of light,
reflecting, as it did, the Sun's brilliancy on the one side and the
Moon's splendor on the other.

Barbican now took a careful observation and calculated that they could
not be much more than 2,000 miles from the object of their journey. The
velocity of the Projectile he calculated to be about 650 feet per second
or 450 miles an hour. They had therefore still plenty of time to reach
the Moon in about four hours. But though the bottom of the Projectile
continued to turn towards the lunar surface in obedience to the law of
centripetal force, the centrifugal force was still evidently strong
enough to change the path which it followed into some kind of curve, the
exact nature of which would be exceedingly difficult to calculate.

The careful observations that Barbican continued to take did not however
prevent him from endeavoring to solve his difficult problem. What _had_
switched them off? The hours passed on, but brought no result. That the
adventurers were approaching the Moon was evident, but it was just as
evident that they should never reach her. The nearest point the
Projectile could ever possibly attain would only be the result of two
opposite forces, the attractive and the repulsive, which, as was now
clear, influenced its motion. Therefore, to land in the Moon was an
utter impossibility, and any such idea was to be given up at once and
for ever.

"_Quand même_! What of it!" cried Ardan; after some moments' silence.
"We're not to land in the Moon! Well! let us do the next best
thing--pass close enough to discover her secrets!"

But M'Nicholl could not accept the situation so coolly. On the contrary,
he decidedly lost his temper, as is occasionally the case with even
phlegmatic men. He muttered an oath or two, but in a voice hardly loud
enough to reach Barbican's ear. At last, impatient of further restraint,
he burst out:

"Who the deuce cares for her secrets? To the hangman with her secrets!
We started to land in the Moon! That's what's got to be done! That I
want or nothing! Confound the darned thing, I say, whatever it was,
whether on the Earth or off it, that shoved us off the track!"

"On the Earth or off it!" cried Barbican, striking his head suddenly;
"now I see it! You're right, Captain! Confound the bolide that we met
the first night of our journey!"

"Hey?" cried Ardan.

"What do you mean?" asked M'Nicholl.

"I mean," replied Barbican, with a voice now perfectly calm, and in a
tone of quiet conviction, "that our deviation is due altogether to that
wandering meteor."

"Why, it did not even graze us!" cried Ardan.

"No matter for that," replied Barbican. "Its mass, compared to ours, was
enormous, and its attraction was undoubtedly sufficiently great to
influence our deviation."

"Hardly enough to be appreciable," urged M'Nicholl.

"Right again, Captain," observed Barbican. "But just remember an
observation of your own made this very afternoon: an inch, a line, even
the tenth part of a hair's breadth wrong at the beginning, in a journey
of 240 thousand miles, would be sufficient to make us miss the Moon!"




CHAPTER X.

THE OBSERVERS OF THE MOON.


Barbican's happy conjecture had probably hit the nail on the head. The
divergency even of a second may amount to millions of miles if you only
have your lines long enough. The Projectile had certainly gone off its
direct course; whatever the cause, the fact was undoubted. It was a
great pity. The daring attempt must end in a failure due altogether to a
fortuitous accident, against which no human foresight could have
possibly taken precaution. Unless in case of the occurrence of some
other most improbable accident, reaching the Moon was evidently now
impossible. To failure, therefore, our travellers had to make up their
minds.

But was nothing to be gained by the trip? Though missing actual contact
with the Moon, might they not pass near enough to solve several problems
in physics and geology over which scientists had been for a long time
puzzling their brains in vain? Even this would be some compensation for
all their trouble, courage, and intelligence. As to what was to be their
own fate, to what doom were themselves to be reserved--they never
appeared to think of such a thing. They knew very well that in the midst
of those infinite solitudes they should soon find themselves without
air. The slight supply that kept them from smothering could not
possibly last more than five or six days longer. Five or six days! What
of that? _Quand même_! as Ardan often exclaimed. Five or six days were
centuries to our bold adventurers! At present every second was a year in
events, and infinitely too precious to be squandered away in mere
preparations for possible contingencies. The Moon could never be
reached, but was it not possible that her surface could be carefully
observed? This they set themselves at once to find out.

The distance now separating them from our Satellite they estimated at
about 400 miles. Therefore relatively to their power of discovering the
details of her disc, they were still farther off from the Moon than some
of our modern astronomers are to-day, when provided with their powerful
telescopes.

We know, for example, that Lord Rosse's great telescope at Parsonstown,
possessing a power of magnifying 6000 times, brings the Moon to within
40 miles of us; not to speak of Barbican's great telescope on the summit
of Long's Peak, by which the Moon, magnified 48,000 times, was brought
within 5 miles of the Earth, where it therefore could reveal with
sufficient distinctness every object above 40 feet in diameter.

Therefore our adventurers, though at such a comparatively small
distance, could not make out the topographical details of the Moon with
any satisfaction by their unaided vision. The eye indeed could easily
enough catch the rugged outline of these vast depressions improperly
called "Seas," but it could do very little more. Its powers of
adjustability seemed to fail before the strange and bewildering scene.
The prominence of the mountains vanished, not only through the
foreshortening, but also in the dazzling radiation produced by the
direct reflection of the solar rays. After a short time therefore,
completely foiled by the blinding glare, the eye turned itself
unwillingly away, as if from a furnace of molten silver.

The spherical surface, however, had long since begun to reveal its
convexity. The Moon was gradually assuming the appearance of a gigantic
egg with the smaller end turned towards the Earth. In the earlier days
of her formation, while still in a state of mobility, she had been
probably a perfect sphere in shape, but, under the influence of
terrestrial gravity operating for uncounted ages, she was drawn at last
so much towards the centre of attraction as to resemble somewhat a
prolate spheriod. By becoming a satellite, she had lost the native
perfect regularity of her outline; her centre of gravity had shifted
from her real centre; and as a result of this arrangement, some
scientists have drawn the conclusion that the Moon's air and water have
been attracted to that portion of her surface which is always invisible
to the inhabitants of the Earth.

The convexity of her outline, this bulging prominence of her surface,
however, did not last long. The travellers were getting too near to
notice it. They were beginning to survey the Moon as balloonists survey
the Earth. The Projectile was now moving with great rapidity--with
nothing like its initial velocity, but still eight or nine times faster
than an express train. Its line of movement, however, being oblique
instead of direct, was so deceptive as to induce Ardan to flatter
himself that they might still reach the lunar surface. He could never
persuade himself to believe that they should get so near their aim and
still miss it. No; nothing might, could, would or should induce him to
believe it, he repeated again and again. But Barbican's pitiless logic
left him no reply.

"No, dear friend, no. We can reach the Moon only by a fall, and we don't
fall. Centripetal force keeps us at least for a while under the lunar
influence, but centrifugal force drives us away irresistibly."

These words were uttered in a tone that killed Ardan's last and fondest
hope.

       *       *       *       *       *

The portion of the Moon they were now approaching was her northern
hemisphere, found usually in the lower part of lunar maps. The lens of a
telescope, as is well known, gives only the inverted image of the
object; therefore, when an upright image is required, an additional
glass must be used. But as every additional glass is an additional
obstruction to the light, the object glass of a Lunar telescope is
employed without a corrector; light is thereby saved, and in viewing the
Moon, as in viewing a map, it evidently makes very little difference
whether we see her inverted or not. Maps of the Moon therefore, being
drawn from the image formed by the telescope, show the north in the
lower part, and _vice versa_. Of this kind was the _Mappa
Selenographica_, by Beer and Maedler, so often previously alluded to and
now carefully consulted by Barbican. The northern hemisphere, towards
which they were now rapidly approaching, presented a strong contrast
with the southern, by its vast plains and great depressions, checkered
here and there by very remarkable isolated mountains.[A]

At midnight the Moon was full. This was the precise moment at which the
travellers would have landed had not that unlucky bolide drawn them off
the track. The Moon was therefore strictly up to time, arriving at the
instant rigidly determined by the Cambridge Observatory. She occupied
the exact point, to a mathematical nicety, where our 28th parallel
crossed the perigee. An observer posted in the bottom of the Columbiad
at Stony Hill, would have found himself at this moment precisely under
the Moon. The axis of the enormous gun, continued upwards vertically,
would have struck the orb of night exactly in her centre.

It is hardly necessary to tell our readers that, during this memorable
night of the 5th and 6th of December, the travellers had no desire to
close their eyes. Could they do so, even if they had desired? No! All
their faculties, thoughts, and desires, were concentrated in one single
word: "Look!" Representatives of the Earth, and of all humanity past and
present, they felt that it was with their eyes that the race of man
contemplated the lunar regions and penetrated the secrets of our
satellite! A certain indescribable emotion therefore, combined with an
undefined sense of responsibility, held possession of their hearts, as
they moved silently from window to window.

Their observations, recorded by Barbican, were vigorously remade,
revised, and re-determined, by the others. To make them, they had
telescopes which they now began to employ with great advantage. To
regulate and investigate them, they had the best maps of the day.

Whilst occupied in this silent work, they could not help throwing a
short retrospective glance on the former Observers of the Moon.

The first of these was Galileo. His slight telescope magnified only
thirty times, still, in the spots flecking the lunar surface, like the
eyes checkering a peacock's tail, he was the first to discover mountains
and even to measure their heights. These, considering the difficulties
under which he labored, were wonderfully accurate, but unfortunately he
made no map embodying his observations.

A few years afterwards, Hevel of Dantzic, (1611-1688) a Polish
astronomer--more generally known as Hevelius, his works being all
written in Latin--undertook to correct Galileo's measurements. But as
his method could be strictly accurate only twice a month--the periods of
the first and second quadratures--his rectifications could be hardly
called successful.

Still it is to the labors of this eminent astronomer, carried on
uninterruptedly for fifty years in his own observatory, that we owe the
first map of the Moon. It was published in 1647 under the name of
_Selenographia_. He represented the circular mountains by open spots
somewhat round in shape, and by shaded figures he indicated the vast
plains, or, as he called them, the _seas_, that occupied so much of her
surface. These he designated by names taken from our Earth. His map
shows you a _Mount Sinai_ the midst of an _Arabia_, an _Ætna_ in the
centre of a _Sicily_, _Alps_, _Apennines_, _Carpathians_, a
_Mediterranean_, a _Palus Mæolis_, a _Pontus Euxinus_, and a _Caspian
Sea_. But these names seem to have been given capriciously and at
random, for they never recall any resemblance existing between
themselves and their namesakes on our globe. In the wide open spot, for
instance, connected on the south with vast continents and terminating in
a point, it would be no easy matter to recognize the reversed image of
the _Indian Peninsula_, the _Bay of Bengal_, and _Cochin China_.
Naturally, therefore, these names were nearly all soon dropped; but
another system of nomenclature, proposed by an astronomer better
acquainted with the human heart, met with a success that has lasted to
the present day.

This was Father Riccioli, a Jesuit, and (1598-1671) a contemporary of
Hevelius. In his _Astronomia Reformata_, (1665), he published a rough
and incorrect map of the Moon, compiled from observations made by
Grimaldi of Ferrara; but in designating the mountains, he named them
after eminent astronomers, and this idea of his has been carefully
carried out by map makers of later times.

A third map of the Moon was published at Rome in 1666 by Dominico
Cassini of Nice (1625-1712), the famous discoverer of Saturn's
satellites. Though somewhat incorrect regarding measurements, it was
superior to Riccioli's in execution, and for a long time it was
considered a standard work. Copies of this map are still to be found,
but Cassini's original copper-plate, preserved for a long time at the
_Imprimerie Royale_ in Paris, was at last sold to a brazier, by no less
a personage than the Director of the establishment himself, who,
according to Arago, wanted to get rid of what he considered useless
lumber!

La Hire (1640-1718), professor of astronomy in the _Collège de France_,
and an accomplished draughtsman, drew a map of the Moon which was
thirteen feet in diameter. This map could be seen long afterwards in the
library of St. Genevieve, Paris, but it was never engraved.

About 1760, Mayer, a famous German astronomer and the director of the
observatory of Göttingen, began the publication of a magnificent map of
the Moon, drawn after lunar measurements all rigorously verified by
himself. Unfortunately his death in 1762 interrupted a work which would
have surpassed in accuracy every previous effort of the kind.

Next appears Schroeter of Erfurt (1745-1816), a fine observer (he first
discovered the Lunar _Rills_), but a poor draughtsman: his maps are
therefore of little value. Lohrman of Dresden published in 1838 an
excellent map of the Moon, 15 inches in diameter, accompanied by
descriptive text and several charts of particular portions on a larger
scale.

But this and all other maps were thrown completely into the shade by
Beer and Maedler's famous _Mappa Selenographica_, so often alluded to in
the course of this work. This map, projected orthographically--that is,
one in which all the rays proceeding from the surface to the eye are
supposed to be parallel to each other--gives a reproduction of the lunar
disc exactly as it appears. The representation of the mountains and
plains is therefore correct only in the central portion; elsewhere,
north, south, east, or west, the features, being foreshortened, are
crowded together, and cannot be compared in measurement with those in
the centre. It is more than three feet square; for convenient reference
it is divided into four parts, each having a very full index; in short,
this map is in all respects a master piece of lunar cartography.[B]

After Beer and Maedler, we should allude to Julius Schmitt's (of Athens)
excellent selenographic reliefs: to Doctor Draper's, and to Father
Secchi's successful application of photography to lunar representation;
to De La Rue's (of London) magnificent stereographs of the Moon, to be
had at every optician's; to the clear and correct map prepared by
Lecouturier and Chapuis in 1860; to the many beautiful pictures of the
Moon in various phases of illumination obtained by the Messrs. Bond of
Harvard University; to Rutherford's (of New York) unparalleled lunar
photographs; and finally to Nasmyth and Carpenter's wonderful work on
the Moon, illustrated by photographs of her surface in detail, prepared
from models at which they had been laboring for more than a quarter of
the century.

Of all these maps, pictures, and projections, Barbican had provided
himself with only two--Beer and Maedler's in German, and Lecouturier and
Chapuis' in French. These he considered quite sufficient for all
purposes, and certainly they considerably simplified his labors as an
observer.

His best optical instruments were several excellent marine telescopes,
manufactured especially under his direction. Magnifying the object a
hundred times, on the surface of the Earth they would have brought the
Moon to within a distance of somewhat less than 2400 miles. But at the
point to which our travellers had arrived towards three o'clock in the
morning, and which could hardly be more than 12 or 1300 miles from the
Moon, these telescopes, ranging through a medium disturbed by no
atmosphere, easily brought the lunar surface to within less than 13
miles' distance from the eyes of our adventurers.

Therefore they should now see objects in the Moon as clearly as people
can see the opposite bank of a river that is about 12 miles wide.

[Footnote A: In our Map of the Moon, prepared expressly for this work,
we have so far improved on Beer and Maedler as to give her surface as it
appears to the naked eye: that is, the north is in the north; only we
must always remember that the west is and must be on the _right hand_.]

[Footnote B: In our Map the _Mappa Selenographica_ is copied as closely
and as fully as is necessary for understanding the details of the story.
For further information the reader is referred to Nasmyth's late
magnificent work: the MOON.]




CHAPTER XI.

FACT AND FANCY.


"Have you ever seen the Moon?" said a teacher ironically one day in
class to one of his pupils.

"No, sir;" was the pert reply; "but I think I can safely say I've heard
it spoken about."

Though saying what he considered a smart thing, the pupil was probably
perfectly right. Like the immense majority of his fellow beings, he had
looked at the Moon, heard her talked of, written poetry about her, but,
in the strict sense of the term, he had probably never seen her--that
is--scanned her, examined her, surveyed her, inspected her, reconnoitred
her--even with an opera glass! Not one in a thousand, not one in ten
thousand, has ever examined even the map of our only Satellite. To guard
our beloved and intelligent reader against this reproach, we have
prepared an excellent reduction of Beer and Maedler's _Mappa_, on which,
for the better understanding of what is to follow, we hope he will
occasionally cast a gracious eye.

When you look at any map of the Moon, you are struck first of all with
one peculiarity. Contrary to the arrangement prevailing in Mars and on
our Earth, the continents occupy principally the southern hemisphere of
the lunar orb. Then these continents are far from presenting such sharp
and regular outlines as distinguish the Indian Peninsula, Africa, and
South America. On the contrary, their coasts, angular, jagged, and
deeply indented, abound in bays and peninsulas. They remind you of the
coast of Norway, or of the islands in the Sound, where the land seems to
be cut up into endless divisions. If navigation ever existed on the
Moon's surface, it must have been of a singularly difficult and
dangerous nature, and we can scarcely say which of the two should be
more pitied--the sailors who had to steer through these dangerous and
complicated passes, or the map-makers who had to designate them on their
charts.

You will also remark that the southern pole of the Moon is much more
_continental_ than the northern. Around the latter, there exists only a
slight fringe of lands separated from the other continents by vast
"seas." This word "seas"--a term employed by the first lunar map
constructors--is still retained to designate those vast depressions on
the Moon's surface, once perhaps covered with water, though they are now
only enormous plains. In the south, the continents cover nearly the
whole hemisphere. It is therefore possible that the Selenites have
planted their flag on at least one of their poles, whereas the Parrys
and Franklins of England, the Kanes and the Wilkeses of America, the
Dumont d'Urvilles and the Lamberts of France, have so far met with
obstacles completely insurmountable, while in search of those unknown
points of our terrestrial globe.

The islands--the next feature on the Moon's surface--are exceedingly
numerous. Generally oblong or circular in shape and almost as regular in
outline as if drawn with a compass, they form vast archipelagoes like
the famous group lying between Greece and Asia Minor, which mythology
has made the scene of her earliest and most charming legends. As we gaze
at them, the names of Naxos, Tenedos, Milo, and Carpathos rise up before
our mind's eye, and we begin looking around for the Trojan fleet and
Jason's Argo. This, at least, was Ardan's idea, and at first his eyes
would see nothing on the map but a Grecian archipelago. But his
companions, sound practical men, and therefore totally devoid of
sentiment, were reminded by these rugged coasts of the beetling cliffs
of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia; so that, where the Frenchman saw the
tracks of ancient heroes, the Americans saw only commodious shipping
points and favorable sites for trading posts--all, of course, in the
purest interest of lunar commerce and industry.

To end our hasty sketch of the continental portion of the Moon, we must
say a few words regarding her orthography or mountain systems. With a
fair telescope you can distinguish very readily her mountain chains, her
isolated mountains, her circuses or ring formations, and her rills,
cracks and radiating streaks. The character of the whole lunar relief is
comprised in these divisions. It is a surface prodigiously reticulated,
upheaved and depressed, apparently without the slightest order or
system. It is a vast Switzerland, an enormous Norway, where everything
is the result of direct plutonic action. This surface, so rugged, craggy
and wrinkled, seems to be the result of successive contractions of the
crust, at an early period of the planet's existence. The examination of
the lunar disc is therefore highly favorable for the study of the great
geological phenomena of our own globe. As certain astronomers have
remarked, the Moon's surface, though older than the Earth's, has
remained younger. That is, it has undergone less change. No water has
broken through its rugged elevations, filled up its scowling cavities,
and by incessant action tended continuously to the production of a
general level. No atmosphere, by its disintegrating, decomposing
influence has softened off the rugged features of the plutonic
mountains. Volcanic action alone, unaffected by either aqueous or
atmospheric forces, can here be seen in all its glory. In other words
the Moon looks now as our Earth did endless ages ago, when "she was void
and empty and when darkness sat upon the face of the deep;" eons of ages
ago, long before the tides of the ocean and the winds of the atmosphere
had begun to strew her rough surface with sand and clay, rock and coal,
forest and meadow, gradually preparing it, according to the laws of our
beneficent Creator, to be at last the pleasant though the temporary
abode of Man!

Having wandered over vast continents, your eye is attracted by the
"seas" of dimensions still vaster. Not only their shape, situation, and
look, remind us of our own oceans, but, again like them, they occupy
the greater part of the Moon's surface. The "seas," or, more correctly,
plains, excited our travellers' curiosity to a very high degree, and
they set themselves at once to examine their nature.

The astronomer who first gave names to those "seas" in all probability
was a Frenchman. Hevelius, however, respected them, even Riccioli did
not disturb them, and so they have come down to us. Ardan laughed
heartily at the fancies which they called up, and said the whole thing
reminded him of one of those "maps of matrimony" that he had once seen
or read of in the works of Scudéry or Cyrano de Bergerac.

"However," he added, "I must say that this map has much more reality in
it than could be found in the sentimental maps of the 17th century. In
fact, I have no difficulty whatever in calling it the _Map of Life!_
very neatly divided into two parts, the east and the west, the masculine
and the feminine. The women on the right, and the men on the left!"

At such observations, Ardan's companions only shrugged their shoulders.
A map of the Moon in their eyes was a map of the Moon, no more, no less;
their romantic friend might view it as he pleased. Nevertheless, their
romantic friend was not altogether wrong. Judge a little for yourselves.

What is the first "sea" you find in the hemisphere on the left? The
_Mare Imbrium_ or the Rainy Sea, a fit emblem of our human life, beaten
by many a pitiless storm. In a corresponding part of the southern
hemisphere you see _Mare Nubium_, the Cloudy Sea, in which our poor
human reason so often gets befogged. Close to this lies _Mare Humorum_,
the Sea of Humors, where we sail about, the sport of each fitful breeze,
"everything by starts and nothing long." Around all, embracing all, lies
_Oceanus Procellarum_, the Ocean of Tempests, where, engaged in one
continuous struggle with the gusty whirlwinds, excited by our own
passions or those of others, so few of us escape shipwreck. And, when
disgusted by the difficulties of life, its deceptions, its treacheries
and all the other miseries "that flesh is heir to," where do we too
often fly to avoid them? To the _Sinus Iridium_ or the _Sinus Roris_,
that is Rainbow Gulf and Dewy Gulf whose glittering lights, alas! give
forth no real illumination to guide our stumbling feet, whose sun-tipped
pinnacles have less substance than a dream, whose enchanting waters all
evaporate before we can lift a cup-full to our parched lips! Showers,
storms, fogs, rainbows--is not the whole mortal life of man comprised in
these four words?

Now turn to the hemisphere on the right, the women's side, and you also
discover "seas," more numerous indeed, but of smaller dimensions and
with gentler names, as more befitting the feminine temperament. First
comes _Mare Serenitatis_, the Sea of Serenity, so expressive of the
calm, tranquil soul of an innocent maiden. Near it is _Lacus Somniorum_,
the Lake of Dreams, in which she loves to gaze at her gilded and rosy
future. In the southern division is seen _Mare Nectaris_, the Sea of
Nectar, over whose soft heaving billows she is gently wafted by Love's
caressing winds, "Youth on the prow and Pleasure at the helm." Not far
off is _Mare Fecunditatis_, the Sea of Fertility, in which she becomes
the happy mother of rejoicing children. A little north is _Mare
Crisium_, the Sea of Crises where her life and happiness are sometimes
exposed to sudden, and unexpected dangers which fortunately, however,
seldom end fatally. Far to the left, near the men's side, is _Mare
Vaporum_, the Sea of Vapors, into which, though it is rather small, and
full of sunken rocks, she sometimes allows herself to wander, moody, and
pouting, and not exactly knowing where she wants to go or what she wants
to do. Between the two last expands the great _Mare Tranquillitatis_,
the Sea of Tranquillity, into whose quiet depths are at last absorbed
all her simulated passions, all her futile aspirations, all her
unglutted desires, and whose unruffled waters are gliding on forever in
noiseless current towards _Lacus Mortis_, the Lake of Death, whose misty
shores

    "In ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods are girt."

So at least Ardan mused as he stooped over Beer and Maedler's map. Did
not these strange successive names somewhat justify his flights of
fancy? Surely they had a wonderful variety of meaning. Was it by
accident or by forethought deep that the two hemispheres of the Moon had
been thus so strangely divided, yet, as man to woman, though divided
still united, and thus forming even in the cold regions of space a
perfect image of our terrestrial existence? Who can say that our
romantic French friend was altogether wrong in thus explaining the
astute fancies of the old astronomers?

His companions, however, it need hardly be said, never saw the "seas" in
that light. They looked on them not with sentimental but with
geographical eyes. They studied this new world and tried to get it by
heart, working at it like a school boy at his lessons. They began by
measuring its angles and diameters.

To their practical, common sense vision _Mare Nubium_, the Cloudy Sea,
was an immense depression of the surface, sprinkled here and there with
a few circular mountains. Covering a great portion of that part of the
southern hemisphere which lies east of the centre, it occupied a space
of about 270 thousand square miles, its central point lying in 15° south
latitude and 20° east longitude. Northeast from this lay _Oceanus
Procellarum_, the Ocean of Tempests, the most extensive of all the
plains on the lunar disc, embracing a surface of about half a million of
square miles, its centre being in 10° north and 45° east. From its bosom
those wonderful mountains _Kepler_ and _Aristarchus_ lifted their vast
ramparts glittering with innumerable streaks radiating in all
directions.

To the north, in the direction of _Mare Frigoris_, extends _Mare
Imbrium_, the Sea of Rains, its central point in 35° north and 20°
east. It is somewhat circular in shape, and it covers a space of about
300 thousand square miles. South of _Oceanus Procellarum_ and separated
from _Mare Nubium_ by a goodly number of ring mountains, lies the little
basin of _Mare Humorum_, the Sea of Humors, containing only about 66
thousand square miles, its central point having a latitude of 25° south
and a longitude of 40° east.

On the shores of these great seas three "Gulfs" are easily found: _Sinus
Aestuum_, the Gulf of the Tides, northeast of the centre; _Sinus
Iridium_, the Gulf of the Rainbows, northeast of the _Mare Imbrium_; and
_Sinus Roris_, the Dewy Gulf, a little further northeast. All seem to be
small plains enclosed between chains of lofty mountains.

The western hemisphere, dedicated to the ladies, according to Ardan, and
therefore naturally more capricious, was remarkable for "seas" of
smaller dimensions, but much more numerous. These were principally:
_Mare Serenitatis_, the Sea of Serenity, 25° north and 20° west,
comprising a surface of about 130 thousand square miles; _Mare Crisium_,
the Sea of Crises, a round, well defined, dark depression towards the
northwestern edge, 17° north 55° west, embracing a surface of 60
thousand square miles, a regular Caspian Sea in fact, only that the
plateau in which it lies buried is surrounded by a girdle of much higher
mountains. Then towards the equator, with a latitude of 5° north and a
longitude of 25° west, appears _Mare Tranquillitatis_, the Sea of
Tranquillity, occupying about 180 thousand square miles. This
communicates on the south with _Mare Nectaris_, the Sea of Nectar,
embracing an extent of about 42 thousand square miles, with a mean
latitude of 15° south and a longitude of 35° west. Southwest from _Mare
Tranquillitatis_, lies _Mare Fecunditatis_, the Sea of Fertility, the
greatest in this hemisphere, as it occupies an extent of more than 300
thousand square miles, its latitude being 3° south and its longitude 50°
west. For away to the north, on the borders of the _Mare Frigoris_, or
Icy Sea, is seen the small _Mare Humboldtianum_, or Humboldt Sea, with a
surface of about 10 thousand square miles. Corresponding to this in the
southern hemisphere lies the _Mare Australe_, or South Sea, whose
surface, as it extends along the western rim, is rather difficult to
calculate. Finally, right in the centre of the lunar disc, where the
equator intersects the first meridian, can be seen _Sinus Medii_, the
Central Gulf, the common property therefore of all the hemispheres, the
northern and southern, as well as of the eastern and western.

Into these great divisions the surface of our satellite resolved itself
before the eyes of Barbican and M'Nicholl. Adding up the various
measurements, they found that the surface of her visible hemisphere was
about 7-1/2 millions of square miles, of which about the two thirds
comprised the volcanoes, the mountain chains, the rings, the islands--in
short, the land portion of the lunar surface; the other third comprised
the "seas," the "lakes," the "marshes," the "bays" or "gulfs," and the
other divisions usually assigned to water.

To all this deeply interesting information, though the fruit of
observation the closest, aided and confirmed by calculation the
profoundest, Ardan listened with the utmost indifference. In fact, even
his French politeness could not suppress two or three decided yawns,
which of course the mathematicians were too absorbed to notice.

In their enthusiasm they tried to make him understand that though the
Moon is 13-1/2 times smaller than our Earth, she can show more than 50
thousand craters, which astronomers have already counted and designated
by specific names.

"To conclude this portion of our investigation therefore," cried
Barbican, clearing his throat, and occupying Aldan's right ear,--"the
Moon's surface is a honey combed, perforated, punctured--"

"A fistulous, a rugose, salebrous,--" cut in the Captain, close on the
left.

--"And highly cribriform superficies--" cried Barbican.

--"A sieve, a riddle, a colander--" shouted the Captain.

--"A skimming dish, a buckwheat cake, a lump of green cheese--" went on
Barbican--.

--In fact, there is no knowing how far they would have proceeded with
their designations, comparisons, and scientific expressions, had not
Ardan, driven to extremities by Barbican's last profanity, suddenly
jumped up, broken away from his companions, and clapped a forcible
extinguisher on their eloquence by putting his hands on their lips and
keeping them there awhile. Then striking a grand attitude, he looked
towards the Moon and burst out in accents of thrilling indignation:

"Pardon, O beautiful Diana of the Ephesians! Pardon, O Phoebe, thou
pearl-faced goddess of night beloved of Greece! O Isis, thou sympathetic
queen of Nile-washed cities! O Astarte, thou favorite deity of the
Syrian hills! O Artemis, thou symbolical daughter of Jupiter and Latona,
that is of light and darkness! O brilliant sister of the radiant Apollo!
enshrined in the enchanting strains of Virgil and Homer, which I only
half learned at college, and therefore unfortunately forget just now!
Otherwise what pleasure I should have had in hurling them at the heads
of Barbican, M'Nicholl, and every other barbarous iconoclast of the
nineteenth century!--"

Here he stopped short, for two reasons: first he was out of breath;
secondly, he saw that the irrepressible scientists had been too busy
making observations of their own to hear a single word of what he had
uttered, and were probably totally unconscious that he had spoken at
all. In a few seconds his breath came back in full blast, but the idea
of talking when only deaf men were listening was so disconcerting as to
leave him actually unable to get off another syllable.




CHAPTER XII.

A BIRD'S EYE VIEW OF THE LUNAR MOUNTAINS.


I am rather inclined to believe myself that not one word of Ardan's
rhapsody had been ever heard by Barbican or M'Nicholl. Long before he
had spoken his last words, they had once more become mute as statues,
and now were both eagerly watching, pencil in hand, spyglass to eye, the
northern lunar hemisphere towards which they were rapidly but indirectly
approaching. They had fully made up their minds by this time that they
were leaving far behind them the central point which they would have
probably reached half an hour ago if they had not been shunted off their
course by that inopportune bolide.

About half past twelve o'clock, Barbican broke the dead silence by
saying that after a careful calculation they were now only about 875
miles from the Moon's surface, a distance two hundred miles less in
length than the lunar radius, and which was still to be diminished as
they advanced further north. They were at that moment ten degrees north
of the equator, almost directly over the ridge lying between the _Mare
Serenitatis_ and the _Mare Tranquillitatis_. From this latitude all the
way up to the north pole the travellers enjoyed a most satisfactory view
of the Moon in all directions and under the most favorable conditions.
By means of their spyglasses, magnifying a hundred times, they cut down
this distance of 875 miles to about 9. The great telescope of the Rocky
Mountains, by its enormous magnifying power of 48,000, brought the Moon,
it is true, within a distance of 5 miles, or nearly twice as near; but
this advantage of nearness was considerably more than counterbalanced by
a want of clearness, resulting from the haziness and refractiveness of
the terrestrial atmosphere, not to mention those fatal defects in the
reflector that the art of man has not yet succeeded in remedying.
Accordingly, our travellers, armed with excellent telescopes--of just
power enough to be no injury to clearness,--and posted on unequalled
vantage ground, began already to distinguish certain details that had
probably never been noticed before by terrestrial observers. Even Ardan,
by this time quite recovered from his fit of sentiment and probably
infected a little by the scientific enthusiasm of his companions, began
to observe and note and observe and note, alternately, with all the
_sangfroid_ of a veteran astronomer.

"Friends," said Barbican, again interrupting a silence that had lasted
perhaps ten minutes, "whither we are going I can't say; if we shall ever
revisit the Earth, I can't tell. Still, it is our duty so to act in all
respects as if these labors of ours were one day to be of service to our
fellow-creatures. Let us keep our souls free from every distraction. We
are now astronomers. We see now what no mortal eye has ever gazed on
before. This Projectile is simply a work room of the great Cambridge
Observatory lifted into space. Let us take observations!"

With these words, he set to work with a renewed ardor, in which his
companions fully participated. The consequence was that they soon had
several of the outline maps covered with the best sketches they could
make of the Moon's various aspects thus presented under such favorable
circumstances. They could now remark not only that they were passing the
tenth degree of north latitude, but that the Projectile followed almost
directly the twentieth degree of east longitude.

"One thing always puzzled me when examining maps of the Moon," observed
Ardan, "and I can't say that I see it yet as clearly as if I had thought
over the matter. It is this. I could understand, when looking through a
lens at an object, why we get only its reversed image--a simple law of
optics explains _that_. Therefore, in a map of the Moon, as the bottom
means the north and the top the south, why does not the right mean the
west and the left the east? I suppose I could have made this out by a
little thought, but thinking, that is reflection, not being my forte, it
is the last thing I ever care to do. Barbican, throw me a word or two on
the subject."

"I can see what troubles you," answered Barbican, "but I can also see
that one moment's reflection would have put an end to your perplexity.
On ordinary maps of the Earth's surface when the north is the top, the
right hand must be the east, the left hand the west, and so on. That is
simply because we look _down_ from _above_. And such a map seen through
a lens will appear reversed in all respects. But in looking at the Moon,
that is _up_ from _down_, we change our position so far that our right
hand points west and our left east. Consequently, in our reversed map,
though the north becomes south, the right remains east, and--"

"Enough said! I see it at a glance! Thank you, Barbican. Why did not
they make you a professor of astronomy? Your hint will save me a world
of trouble."[C]

Aided by the _Mappa Selenographica_, the travellers could easily
recognize the different portions of the Moon over which they were now
moving. An occasional glance at our reduction of this map, given as a
frontispiece, will enable the gentle reader to follow the travellers on
the line in which they moved and to understand the remarks and
observations in which they occasionally indulged.

"Where are we now?" asked Ardan.

"Over the northern shores of the _Mare Nubium_," replied Barbican. "But
we are still too far off to see with any certainty what they are like.
What is the _Mare_ itself? A sea, according to the early astronomers? a
plain of solid sand, according to later authority? or an immense forest,
according to De la Rue of London, so far the Moon's most successful
photographer? This gentleman's authority, Ardan, would have given you
decided support in your famous dispute with the Captain at the meeting
near Tampa, for he says very decidedly that the Moon has an atmosphere,
very low to be sure but very dense. This, however, we must find out for
ourselves; and in the meantime let us affirm nothing until we have good
grounds for positive assertion."

_Mare Nubium_, though not very clearly outlined on the maps, is easily
recognized by lying directly east of the regions about the centre. It
would appear as if this vast plain were sprinkled with immense lava
blocks shot forth from the great volcanoes on the right, _Ptolemaeus_,
_Alphonse_, _Alpetragius_ and _Arzachel_. But the Projectile advanced so
rapidly that these mountains soon disappeared, and the travellers were
not long before they could distinguish the great peaks that closed the
"Sea" on its northern boundary. Here a radiating mountain showed a
summit so dazzling with the reflection of the solar rays that Ardan
could not help crying out:

"It looks like one of the carbon points of an electric light projected
on a screen! What do you call it, Barbican?"

"_Copernicus_," replied the President. "Let us examine old
_Copernicus_!"

This grand crater is deservedly considered one of the greatest of the
lunar wonders. It lifts its giant ramparts to upwards of 12,000 feet
above the level of the lunar surface. Being quite visible from the Earth
and well situated for observation, it is a favorite object for
astronomical study; this is particularly the case during the phase
existing between Last Quarter and the New Moon, when its vast shadows,
projected boldly from the east towards the west, allow its prodigious
dimensions to be measured.

After _Tycho_, which is situated in the southern hemisphere,
_Copernicus_ forms the most important radiating mountain in the lunar
disc. It looms up, single and isolated, like a gigantic light-house, on
the peninsula separating _Mare Nubium_ from _Oceanus Procellarum_ on one
side and from _Mare Imbrium_ on the other; thus illuminating with its
splendid radiation three "Seas" at a time. The wonderful complexity of
its bright streaks diverging on all sides from its centre presented a
scene alike splendid and unique. These streaks, the travellers thought,
could be traced further north than in any other direction: they fancied
they could detect them even in the _Mare Imbrium_, but this of course
might be owing to the point from which they made their observations. At
one o'clock in the morning, the Projectile, flying through space, was
exactly over this magnificent mountain.

In spite of the brilliant sunlight that was blazing around them, the
travellers could easily recognize the peculiar features of _Copernicus_.
It belongs to those ring mountains of the first class called Circuses.
Like _Kepler_ and _Aristarchus_, who rule over _Oceanus Procellarum_,
_Copernicus_, when viewed through our telescopes, sometimes glistens so
brightly through the ashy light of the Moon that it has been frequently
taken for a volcano in full activity. Whatever it may have been once,
however, it is certainly nothing more now than, like all the other
mountains on the visible side of the Moon, an extinct volcano, only with
a crater of such exceeding grandeur and sublimity as to throw utterly
into the shade everything like it on our Earth. The crater of Etna is at
most little more than a mile across. The crater of _Copernicus_ has a
diameter of at least 50 miles. Within it, the travellers could easily
discover by their glasses an immense number of terraced ridges, probably
landslips, alternating with stratifications resulting from successive
eruptions. Here and there, but particularly in the southern side, they
caught glimpses of shadows of such intense blackness, projected across
the plateau and lying there like pitch spots, that they could not tell
them from yawning chasms of incalculable depth. Outside the crater the
shadows were almost as deep, whilst on the plains all around,
particularly in the west, so many small craters could be detected that
the eye in vain attempted to count them.

"Many circular mountains of this kind," observed Barbican, "can be seen
on the lunar surface, but _Copernicus_, though not one of the greatest,
is one of the most remarkable on account of those diverging streaks of
bright light that you see radiating from its summit. By looking
steadily into its crater, you can see more cones than mortal eye ever
lit on before. They are so numerous as to render the interior plateau
quite rugged, and were formerly so many openings giving vent to fire and
volcanic matter. A curious and very common arrangement of this internal
plateau of lunar craters is its lying at a lower level than the external
plains, quite the contrary to a terrestrial crater, which generally has
its bottom much higher than the level of the surrounding country. It
follows therefore that the deep lying curve of the bottom of these ring
mountains would give a sphere with a diameter somewhat smaller than the
Moon's."

"What can be the cause of this peculiarity?" asked M'Nicholl.

"I can't tell;" answered Barbican, "but, as a conjecture, I should say
that it is probably to the comparatively smaller area of the Moon and
the more violent character of her volcanic action that the extremely
rugged character of her surface is mainly due."

"Why, it's the _Campi Phlegraei_ or the Fire Fields of Naples over
again!" cried Ardan suddenly. "There's _Monte Barbaro_, there's the
_Solfatara_, there is the crater of _Astroni_, and there is the _Monte
Nuovo_, as plain as the hand on my body!"

"The great resemblance between the region you speak of and the general
surface of the Moon has been often remarked;" observed Barbican, "but
it is even still more striking in the neighborhood of _Theophilus_ on
the borders of _Mare Nectaris_."

"That's _Mare Nectaris_, the gray spot over there on the southwest,
isn't it?" asked M'Nicholl; "is there any likelihood of our getting a
better view of it?"

"Not the slightest," answered Barbican, "unless we go round the Moon and
return this way, like a satellite describing its orbit."

By this time they had arrived at a point vertical to the mountain
centre. _Copernicus's_ vast ramparts formed a perfect circle or rather a
pair of concentric circles. All around the mountain extended a dark
grayish plain of savage aspect, on which the peak shadows projected
themselves in sharp relief. In the gloomy bottom of the crater, whose
dimensions are vast enough to swallow Mont Blanc body and bones, could
be distinguished a magnificent group of cones, at least half a mile in
height and glittering like piles of crystal. Towards the north several
breaches could be seen in the ramparts, due probably to a caving in of
immense masses accumulated on the summit of the precipitous walls.

As already observed, the surrounding plains were dotted with numberless
craters mostly of small dimensions, except _Gay Lussac_ on the north,
whose crater was about 12 miles in diameter. Towards the southwest and
the immediate east, the plain appeared to be very flat, no protuberance,
no prominence of any kind lifting itself above the general dead level.
Towards the north, on the contrary, as far as where the peninsula
jutted on _Oceanus Procellarum_, the plain looked like a sea of lava
wildly lashed for a while by a furious hurricane and then, when its
waves and breakers and driving ridges were at their wildest, suddenly
frozen into solidity. Over this rugged, rumpled, wrinkled surface and in
all directions, ran the wonderful streaks whose radiating point appeared
to be the summit of _Copernicus_. Many of them appeared to be ten miles
wide and hundreds of miles in length.

The travellers disputed for some time on the origin of these strange
radii, but could hardly be said to have arrived at any conclusion more
satisfactory than that already reached by some terrestrial observers.

To M'Nicholl's question:

"Why can't these streaks be simply prolonged mountain crests reflecting
the sun's rays more vividly by their superior altitude and comparative
smoothness?"

Barbican readily replied:

"These streaks _can't_ be mountain crests, because, if they were, under
certain conditions of solar illumination they should project
_shadows_--a thing which they have never been known to do under any
circumstances whatever. In fact, it is only during the period of the
full Moon that these streaks are seen at all; as soon as the sun's rays
become oblique, they disappear altogether--a proof that their appearance
is due altogether to peculiar advantages in their surface for the
reflection of light."

"Dear boys, will you allow me to give my little guess on the subject?"
asked Ardan.

His companions were profuse in expressing their desire to hear it.

"Well then," he resumed, "seeing that these bright streaks invariably
start from a certain point to radiate in all directions, why not suppose
them to be streams of lava issuing from the crater and flowing down the
mountain side until they cooled?"

"Such a supposition or something like it has been put forth by
Herschel," replied Barbican; "but your own sense will convince you that
it is quite untenable when you consider that lava, however hot and
liquid it may be at the commencement of its journey, cannot flow on for
hundreds of miles, up hills, across ravines, and over plains, all the
time in streams of almost exactly equal width."

"That theory of yours holds no more water than mine, Ardan," observed
M'Nicholl.

"Correct, Captain," replied the Frenchman; "Barbican has a trick of
knocking the bottom out of every weaker vessel. But let us hear what he
has to say on the subject himself. What is your theory. Barbican?"

"My theory," said Barbican, "is pretty much the same as that lately
presented by an English astronomer, Nasmyth, who has devoted much study
and reflection to lunar matters. Of course, I only formulate my theory,
I don't affirm it. These streaks are cracks, made in the Moon's surface
by cooling or by shrinkage, through which volcanic matter has been
forced up by internal pressure. The sinking ice of a frozen lake, when
meeting with some sharp pointed rock, cracks in a radiating manner:
every one of its fissures then admits the water, which immediately
spreads laterally over the ice pretty much as the lava spreads itself
over the lunar surface. This theory accounts for the radiating nature of
the streaks, their great and nearly equal thickness, their immense
length, their inability to cast a shadow, and their invisibility at any
time except at or near the Full Moon. Still it is nothing but a theory,
and I don't deny that serious objections may be brought against it."

"Do you know, dear boys," cried Ardan, led off as usual by the slightest
fancy, "do you know what I am thinking of when I look down on the great
rugged plains spread out beneath us?"

"I can't say, I'm sure," replied Barbican, somewhat piqued at the little
attention he had secured for his theory.

"Well, what are you thinking of?" asked M'Nicholl.

"Spillikins!" answered Ardan triumphantly.

"Spillikins?" cried his companions, somewhat surprised.

"Yes, Spillikins! These rocks, these blocks, these peaks, these streaks,
these cones, these cracks, these ramparts, these escarpments,--what are
they but a set of spillikins, though I acknowledge on a grand scale? I
wish I had a little hook to pull them one by one!"

[Illustration: AN IMMENSE BATTLEFIELD.]

"Oh, do be serious, Ardan!" cried Barbican, a little impatiently.

"Certainly," replied Ardan. "Let us be serious, Captain, since
seriousness best befits the subject in hand. What do you think of
another comparison? Does not this plain look like an immense battle
field piled with the bleaching bones of myriads who had slaughtered each
other to a man at the bidding of some mighty Caesar? What do you think
of that lofty comparison, hey?"

"It is quite on a par with the other," muttered Barbican.

"He's hard to please, Captain," continued Ardan, "but let us try him
again! Does not this plain look like--?"

"My worthy friend," interrupted Barbican, quietly, but in a tone to
discourage further discussion, "what you think the plain _looks like_ is
of very slight import, as long as you know no more than a child what it
really _is_!"

"Bravo, Barbican! well put!" cried the irrepressible Frenchman. "Shall I
ever realize the absurdity of my entering into an argument with a
scientist!"

But this time the Projectile, though advancing northward with a pretty
uniform velocity, had neither gained nor lost in its nearness to the
lunar disc. Each moment altering the character of the fleeting landscape
beneath them, the travellers, as may well be imagined, never thought of
taking an instant's repose. At about half past one, looking to their
right on the west, they saw the summits of another mountain; Barbican,
consulting his map, recognized _Eratosthenes_.

This was a ring mountain, about 33 miles in diameter, having, like
_Copernicus_, a crater of immense profundity containing central cones.
Whilst they were directing their glasses towards its gloomy depths,
Barbican mentioned to his friends Kepler's strange idea regarding the
formation of these ring mountains. "They must have been constructed," he
said, "by mortal hands."

"With what object?" asked the Captain.

"A very natural one," answered Barbican. "The Selenites must have
undertaken the immense labor of digging these enormous pits at places of
refuge in which they could protect themselves against the fierce solar
rays that beat against them for 15 days in succession!"

"Not a bad idea, that of the Selenites!" exclaimed Ardan.

"An absurd idea!" cried M'Nicholl. "But probably Kepler never knew the
real dimensions of these craters. Barbican knows the trouble and time
required to dig a well in Stony Hill only nine hundred feet deep. To dig
out a single lunar crater would take hundreds and hundreds of years, and
even then they should be giants who would attempt it!"

"Why so?" asked Ardan. "In the Moon, where gravity is six times less
than on the Earth, the labor of the Selenites can't be compared with
that of men like us."

"But suppose a Selenite to be six times smaller than a man like us!"
urged M'Nicholl.

"And suppose a Selenite never had an existence at all!" interposed
Barbican with his usual success in putting an end to the argument. "But
never mind the Selenites now. Observe _Eratosthenes_ as long as you have
the opportunity."

"Which will not be very long," said M'Nicholl. "He is already sinking
out of view too far to the right to be carefully observed."

"What are those peaks beyond him?" asked Ardan.

"The _Apennines_," answered Barbican; "and those on the left are the
_Carpathians_."

"I have seen very few mountain chains or ranges in the Moon," remarked
Ardan, after some minutes' observation.

"Mountains chains are not numerous in the Moon," replied Barbican, "and
in that respect her oreographic system presents a decided contrast with
that of the Earth. With us the ranges are many, the craters few; in the
Moon the ranges are few and the craters innumerable."

Barbican might have spoken of another curious feature regarding the
mountain ranges: namely, that they are chiefly confined to the northern
hemisphere, where the craters are fewest and the "seas" the most
extensive.

For the benefit of those interested, and to be done at once with this
part of the subject, we give in the following little table a list of the
chief lunar mountain chains, with their latitude, and respective
heights in English feet.

              _Name._          _Degrees of Latitude._      _Height._

            { _Altai Mountains_     17° to 28              13,000ft.
Southern    { _Cordilleras_         10  to 20              12,000
Hemisphere. { _Pyrenees_             8  to 18              12,000
            { _Riphean_              5  to 10               2,600

            { _Haemus_              10  to 20               6,300
            { _Carpathian_          15  to 19               6,000
            { _Apennines_           14  to 27              18,000
Northern    { _Taurus_              25  to 34               8,500
Hemisphere. { _Hercynian_           17  to 29               3,400
            { _Caucasus_            33  to 40              17,000
            { _Alps_                42  to 30              10,000

Of these different chains, the most important is that of the
_Apennines_, about 450 miles long, a length, however, far inferior to
that of many of the great mountain ranges of our globe. They skirt the
western shores of the _Mare Imbrium_, over which they rise in immense
cliffs, 18 or 20 thousand feet in height, steep as a wall and casting
over the plain intensely black shadows at least 90 miles long. Of Mt.
_Huyghens_, the highest in the group, the travellers were just barely
able to distinguish the sharp angular summit in the far west. To the
east, however, the _Carpathians_, extending from the 18th to 30th
degrees of east longitude, lay directly under their eyes and could be
examined in all the peculiarities of their distribution.

Barbican proposed a hypothesis regarding the formation of those
mountains, which his companions thought at least as good as any other.
Looking carefully over the _Carpathians_ and catching occasional
glimpses of semi-circular formations and half domes, he concluded that
the chain must have formerly been a succession of vast craters. Then had
come some mighty internal discharge, or rather the subsidence to which
_Mare Imbrium_ is due, for it immediately broke off or swallowed up one
half of those mountains, leaving the other half steep as a wall on one
side and sloping gently on the other to the level of the surrounding
plains. The _Carpathians_ were therefore pretty nearly in the same
condition as the crater mountains _Ptolemy_, _Alpetragius_ and
_Arzachel_ would find themselves in, if some terrible cataclysm, by
tearing away their eastern ramparts, had turned them into a chain of
mountains whose towering cliffs would nod threateningly over the western
shores of _Mare Nubium_. The mean height of the _Carpathians_ is about
6,000 feet, the altitude of certain points in the Pyrenees such as the
_Port of Pineda_, or _Roland's Breach_, in the shadow of _Mont Perdu_.
The northern slopes of the _Carpathians_ sink rapidly towards the shores
of the vast _Mare Imbrium_.

Towards two o'clock in the morning, Barbican calculated the Projectile
to be on the 20th northern parallel, and therefore almost immediately
over the little ring mountain called _Pytheas_, about 4600 feet in
height. The distance of the travellers from the Moon at this point
could not be more than about 750 miles, reduced to about 7 by means of
their excellent telescopes.

_Mare Imbrium_, the Sea of Rains here revealed itself in all its
vastness to the eyes of the travellers, though it must be acknowledged
that the immense depression so called, did not afford them a very clear
idea regarding its exact boundaries. Right ahead of them rose _Lambert_
about a mile in height; and further on, more to the left, in the
direction of _Oceanus Procellarum_, _Euler_ revealed itself by its
glittering radiations. This mountain, of about the same height as
_Lambert_, had been the object of very interesting calculations on the
part of Schroeter of Erfurt. This keen observer, desirous of inquiring
into the probable origin of the lunar mountains, had proposed to himself
the following question: Does the volume of the crater appear to be equal
to that of the surrounding ramparts? His calculations showing him that
this was generally the case, he naturally concluded that these ramparts
must therefore have been the product of a single eruption, for
successive eruptions of volcanic matter would have disturbed this
correlation. _Euler_ alone, he found, to be an exception to this general
law, as the volume of its crater appeared to be twice as great as that
of the mass surrounding it. It must therefore have been formed by
several eruptions in succession, but in that case what had become of the
ejected matter?

Theories of this nature and all manner of scientific questions were, of
course, perfectly permissible to terrestrial astronomers laboring under
the disadvantage of imperfect instruments. But Barbican could not think
of wasting his time in any speculation of the kind, and now, seeing that
his Projectile perceptibly approached the lunar disc, though he
despaired of ever reaching it, he was more sanguine than ever of being
soon able to discover positively and unquestionably some of the secrets
of its formation.

[Footnote C: We must again remind our readers that, in our map, though
every thing is set down as it appears to the eye not as it is reversed
by the telescope, still, for the reason made so clear by Barbican, the
right hand side must be the west and the left the east.]




CHAPTER XIII.

LUNAR LANDSCAPES


At half past two in the morning of December 6th, the travellers crossed
the 30th northern parallel, at a distance from the lunar surface of 625
miles, reduced to about 6 by their spy-glasses. Barbican could not yet
see the least probability of their landing at any point of the disc. The
velocity of the Projectile was decidedly slow, but for that reason
extremely puzzling. Barbican could not account for it. At such a
proximity to the Moon, the velocity, one would think, should be very
great indeed to be able to counteract the lunar attraction. Why did it
not fall? Barbican could not tell; his companions were equally in the
dark. Ardan said he gave it up. Besides they had no time to spend in
investigating it. The lunar panorama was unrolling all its splendors
beneath them, and they could not bear to lose one of its slightest
details.

The lunar disc being brought within a distance of about six miles by the
spy-glasses, it is a fair question to ask, what _could_ an aeronaut at
such an elevation from our Earth discover on its surface? At present
that question can hardly be answered, the most remarkable balloon
ascensions never having passed an altitude of five miles under
circumstances favorable for observers. Here, however, is an account,
carefully transcribed from notes taken on the spot, of what Barbican and
his companions _did_ see from their peculiar post of observation.

Varieties of color, in the first place, appeared here and there upon the
disc. Selenographers are not quite agreed as to the nature of these
colors. Not that such colors are without variety or too faint to be
easily distinguished. Schmidt of Athens even says that if our oceans on
earth were all evaporated, an observer in the Moon would hardly find the
seas and continents of our globe even so well outlined as those of the
Moon are to the eye of a terrestrial observer. According to him, the
shade of color distinguishing those vast plains known as "seas" is a
dark gray dashed with green and brown,--a color presented also by a few
of the great craters.

This opinion of Schmidt's, shared by Beer and Maedler, Barbican's
observations now convinced him to be far better founded than that of
certain astronomers who admit of no color at all being visible on the
Moon's surface but gray. In certain spots the greenish tint was quite
decided, particularly in _Mare Serenitatis_ and _Mare Humorum,_ the very
localities where Schmidt had most noticed it. Barbican also remarked
that several large craters, of the class that had no interior cones,
reflected a kind of bluish tinge, somewhat like that given forth by a
freshly polished steel plate. These tints, he now saw enough to convince
him, proceeded really from the lunar surface, and were not due, as
certain astronomers asserted, either to the imperfections of the
spy-glasses, or to the interference of the terrestrial atmosphere. His
singular opportunity for correct observation allowed him to entertain no
doubt whatever on the subject. Hampered by no atmosphere, he was free
from all liability to optical illusion. Satisfied therefore as to the
reality of these tints, he considered such knowledge a positive gain to
science. But that greenish tint--to what was it due? To a dense tropical
vegetation maintained by a low atmosphere, a mile or so in thickness?
Possibly. But this was another question that could not be answered at
present.

Further on he could detect here and there traces of a decidedly ruddy
tint. Such a shade he knew had been already detected in the _Palus
Somnii_, near _Mare Crisium_, and in the circular area of _Lichtenberg_,
near the _Hercynian Mountains_, on the eastern edge of the Moon. To what
cause was this tint to be attributed? To the actual color of the surface
itself? Or to that of the lava covering it here and there? Or to the
color resulting from the mixture of other colors seen at a distance too
great to allow of their being distinguished separately? Impossible to
tell.

Barbican and his companions succeeded no better at a new problem that
soon engaged their undivided attention. It deserves some detail.

Having passed _Lambert_, being just over _Timocharis_, all were
attentively gazing at the magnificent crater of _Archimedes_ with a
diameter of 52 miles across and ramparts more than 5000 feet in height,
when Ardan startled his companions by suddenly exclaiming:

"Hello! Cultivated fields as I am a living man!"

"What do you mean by your cultivated fields?" asked M'Nicholl sourly,
wiping his glasses and shrugging his shoulders.

"Certainly cultivated fields!" replied Ardan. "Don't you see the
furrows? They're certainly plain enough. They are white too from
glistening in the sun, but they are quite different from the radiating
streaks of _Copernicus_. Why, their sides are perfectly parallel!"

"Where are those furrows?" asked M'Nicholl, putting his glasses to his
eye and adjusting the focus.

"You can see them in all directions," answered Ardan; "but two are
particularly visible: one running north from _Archimedes_, the other
south towards the _Apennines_."

M'Nicholl's face, as he gazed, gradually assumed a grin which soon
developed into a snicker, if not a positive laugh, as he observed to
Ardan:

"Your Selenites must be Brobdignagians, their oxen Leviathans, and their
ploughs bigger than Marston's famous cannon, if these are furrows!"

"How's that, Barbican?" asked Ardan doubtfully, but unwilling to submit
to M'Nicholl.

"They're not furrows, dear friend," said Barbican, "and can't be,
either, simply on account of their immense size. They are what the
German astronomers called _Rillen_; the French, _rainures_, and the
English, _grooves_, _canals_, _clefts_, _cracks_, _chasms_, or
_fissures_."

"You have a good stock of names for them anyhow," observed Ardan, "if
that does any good."

"The number of names given them," answered Barbican, "shows how little
is really known about them. They have been observed in all the level
portion of the Moon's surface. Small as they appear to us, a little
calculation must convince you that they are in some places hundreds of
miles in length, a mile in width and probably in many points several
miles in depth. Their width and depth, however, vary, though their
sides, so far as observed, are always rigorously parallel. Let us take a
good look at them."

Putting the glass to his eye, Barbican examined the clefts for some time
with close attention. He saw that their banks were sharp edged and
extremely steep. In many places they were of such geometrical regularity
that he readily excused Gruithuysen's idea of deeming them to be
gigantic earthworks thrown up by the Selenite engineers. Some of them
were as straight as if laid out with a line, others were curved a little
here and there, though still maintaining the strict parallelism of their
sides. These crossed each other; those entered craters and came out at
the other side. Here, they furrowed annular plateaus, such as
_Posidonius_ or _Petavius_. There, they wrinkled whole seas, for
instance, _Mare Serenitatis_.

These curious peculiarities of the lunar surface had interested the
astronomic mind to a very high degree at their first discovery, and have
proved to be very perplexing problems ever since. The first observers do
not seem to have noticed them. Neither Hevelius, nor Cassini, nor La
Hire, nor Herschel, makes a single remark regarding their nature.

It was Schroeter, in 1789, who called the attention of scientists to
them for the first time. He had only 11 to show, but Lohrmann soon
recorded 75 more. Pastorff, Gruithuysen, and particularly Beer and
Maedler were still more successful, but Julius Schmidt, the famous
astronomer of Athens, has raised their number up to 425, and has even
published their names in a catalogue. But counting them is one thing,
determining their nature is another. They are not fortifications,
certainly: and cannot be ancient beds of dried up rivers, for two very
good and sufficient reasons: first, water, even under the most favorable
circumstances on the Moon's surface, could have never ploughed up such
vast channels; secondly, these chasms often traverse lofty craters
through and through, like an immense railroad cutting.

At these details, Ardan's imagination became unusually excited and of
course it was not without some result. It even happened that he hit on
an idea that had already suggested itself to Schmidt of Athens.

"Why not consider them," he asked, "to be the simple phenomena of
vegetation?"

"What do you mean?" asked Barbican.

"Rows of sugar cane?" suggested M'Nicholl with a snicker.

"Not exactly, my worthy Captain," answered Ardan quietly, "though you
were perhaps nearer to the mark than you expected. I don't mean exactly
rows of sugar cane, but I do mean vast avenues of trees--poplars, for
instance--planted regularly on each side of a great high road."

"Still harping on vegetation!" said the Captain. "Ardan, what a splendid
historian was spoiled in you! The less you know about your facts, the
readier you are to account for them."

"_Ma foi_," said Ardan simply, "I do only what the greatest of your
scientific men do--that is, guess. There is this difference however
between us--I call my guesses, guesses, mere conjecture;--they dignify
theirs as profound theories or as astounding discoveries!"

"Often the case, friend Ardan, too often the case," said Barbican.

"In the question under consideration, however," continued the Frenchman,
"my conjecture has this advantage over some others: it explains why
these rills appear and seem to disappear at regular intervals."

"Let us hear the explanation," said the Captain.

"They become invisible when the trees lose their leaves, and they
reappear when they resume them."

"His explanation is not without ingenuity," observed Barbican to
M'Nicholl, "but, my dear friend," turning to Ardan, "it is hardly
admissible."

"Probably not," said Ardan, "but why not?"

"Because as the Sun is nearly always vertical to the lunar equator, the
Moon can have no change of seasons worth mentioning; therefore her
vegetation can present none of the phenomena that you speak of."

This was perfectly true. The slight obliquity of the Moon's axis, only
1-1/2°, keeps the Sun in the same altitude the whole year around. In the
equatorial regions he is always vertical, and in the polar he is never
higher than the horizon. Therefore, there can be no change of seasons;
according to the latitude, it is a perpetual winter, spring, summer, or
autumn the whole year round. This state of things is almost precisely
similar to that which prevails in Jupiter, who also stands nearly
upright in his orbit, the inclination of his axis being only about 3°.

But how to account for the _grooves_? A very hard nut to crack. They
must certainly be a later formation than the craters and the rings, for
they are often found breaking right through the circular ramparts.
Probably the latest of all lunar features, the results of the last
geological epochs, they are due altogether to expansion or shrinkage
acting on a large scale and brought about by the great forces of nature,
operating after a manner altogether unknown on our earth. Such at least
was Barbican's idea.

"My friends," he quietly observed, "without meaning to put forward any
pretentious claims to originality, but by simply turning to account some
advantages that have never before befallen contemplative mortal eye, why
not construct a little hypothesis of our own regarding the nature of
these grooves and the causes that gave them birth? Look at that great
chasm just below us, somewhat to the right. It is at least fifty or
sixty miles long and runs along the base of the _Apennines_ in a line
almost perfectly straight. Does not its parallelism with the mountain
chain suggest a causative relation? See that other mighty _rill_, at
least a hundred and fifty miles long, starting directly north of it and
pursuing so true a course that it cleaves _Archimedes_ almost cleanly
into two. The nearer it lies to the mountain, as you perceive, the
greater its width; as it recedes in either direction it grows narrower.
Does not everything point out to one great cause of their origin? They
are simple crevasses, like those so often noticed on Alpine glaciers,
only that these tremendous cracks in the surface are produced by the
shrinkage of the crust consequent on cooling. Can we point out some
analogies to this on the Earth? Certainly. The defile of the Jordan,
terminating in the awful depression of the Dead Sea, no doubt occurs to
you on the moment. But the _Yosemite Valley_, as I saw it ten years ago,
is an apter comparison. There I stood on the brink of a tremendous chasm
with perpendicular walls, a mile in width, a mile in depth and eight
miles in length. Judge if I was astounded! But how should we feel it,
when travelling on the lunar surface, we should suddenly find ourselves
on the brink of a yawning chasm two miles wide, fifty miles long, and so
fathomless in sheer vertical depth as to leave its black profundities
absolutely invisible in spite of the dazzling sunlight!"

"I feel my flesh already crawling even in the anticipation!" cried
Ardan.

"I shan't regret it much if we never get to the Moon," growled
M'Nicholl; "I never hankered after it anyhow!"

By this time the Projectile had reached the fortieth degree of lunar
latitude, and could hardly be further than five hundred miles from the
surface, a distance reduced to about 5 miles by the travellers' glasses.
Away to their left appeared _Helicon_, a ring mountain about 1600 feet
high; and still further to the left the eye could catch a glimpse of the
cliffs enclosing a semi-elliptical portion of _Mare Imbrium_, called the
_Sinus Iridium_, or Bay of the Rainbows.

In order to allow astronomers to make complete observations on the lunar
surface, the terrestrial atmosphere should possess a transparency
seventy times greater than its present power of transmission. But in the
void through which the Projectile was now floating, no fluid whatever
interposed between the eye of the observer and the object observed.
Besides, the travellers now found themselves at a distance that had
never before been reached by the most powerful telescopes, including
even Lord Rosse's and the great instrument on the Rocky Mountains.
Barbican was therefore in a condition singularly favorable to resolve
the great question concerning the Moon's inhabitableness. Nevertheless,
the solution still escaped him. He could discover nothing around him but
a dreary waste of immense plains, and towards the north, beneath him,
bare mountains of the aridest character.

Not the slightest vestige of man's work could be detected over the vast
expanse. Not the slightest sign of a ruin spoke of his ever having been
there. Nothing betrayed the slightest trace of the development of animal
life, even in an inferior degree. No movement. Not the least glimpse of
vegetation. Of the three great kingdoms that hold dominion on the
surface of the globe, the mineral, the vegetable and the animal, one
alone was represented on the lunar sphere: the mineral, the whole
mineral, and nothing but the mineral.

"Why!" exclaimed Ardan, with a disconcerted look, after a long and
searching examination, "I can't find anybody. Everything is as
motionless as a street in Pompeii at 4 o'clock in the morning!"

[Illustration: THE SOLUTION STILL ESCAPED HIM.]

"Good comparison, friend Ardan;" observed M'Nicholl. "Lava, slag,
volcanic eminences, vitreous matter glistening like ice, piles of
scoria, pitch black shadows, dazzling streaks, like rivers of light
breaking over jagged rocks--these are now beneath my eye--these alone I
can detect--not a man--not an animal--not a tree. The great American
Desert is a land of milk and honey in comparison with the joyless orb
over which we are now moving. However, even yet we can predicate
nothing positive. The atmosphere may have taken refuge in the depths of
the chasms, in the interior of the craters, or even on the opposite side
of the Moon, for all we know!"

"Still we must remember," observed Barbican, "that even the sharpest eye
cannot detect a man at a distance greater than four miles and a-half,
and our glasses have not yet brought us nearer than five."

"Which means to say," observed Ardan, "that though we can't see the
Selenites, they can see our Projectile!"

But matters had not improved much when, towards four o'clock in the
morning, the travellers found themselves on the 50th parallel, and at a
distance of only about 375 miles from the lunar surface. Still no trace
of the least movement, or even of the lowest form of life.

"What peaked mountain is that which we have just passed on our right?"
asked Ardan. "It is quite remarkable, standing as it does in almost
solitary grandeur in the barren plain."

"That is _Pico_," answered Barbican. "It is at least 8000 feet high and
is well known to terrestrial astronomers as well by its peculiar shadow
as on account of its comparative isolation. See the collection of
perfectly formed little craters nestling around its base."

"Barbican," asked M'Nicholl suddenly, "what peak is that which lies
almost directly south of _Pico_? I see it plainly, but I can't find it
on my map."

"I have remarked that pyramidal peak myself," replied Barbican; "but I
can assure you that so far it has received no name as yet, although it
is likely enough to have been distinguished by the terrestrial
astronomers. It can't be less than 4000 feet in height."

"I propose we called it _Barbican_!" cried Ardan enthusiastically.

"Agreed!" answered M'Nicholl, "unless we can find a higher one."

"We must be before-hand with Schmidt of Athens!" exclaimed Ardan. "He
will leave nothing unnamed that his telescope can catch a glimpse of."

"Passed unanimously!" cried M'Nicholl.

"And officially recorded!" added the Frenchman, making the proper entry
on his map.

"_Salve, Mt. Barbican!_" then cried both gentlemen, rising and taking
off their hats respectfully to the distant peak.

"Look to the west!" interrupted Barbican, watching, as usual, while his
companions were talking, and probably perfectly unconscious of what they
were saying; "directly to the west! Now tell me what you see!"

"I see a vast valley!" answered M'Nicholl.

"Straight as an arrow!" added Ardan.

"Running through lofty mountains!" cried M'Nicholl.

"Cut through with a pair of saws and scooped out with a chisel!" cried
Ardan.

"See the shadows of those peaks!" cried M'Nicholl catching fire at the
sight. "Black, long, and sharp as if cast by cathedral spires!"

"Oh! ye crags and peaks!" burst forth Ardan; "how I should like to catch
even a faint echo of the chorus you could chant, if a wild storm roared
over your beetling summits! The pine forests of Norwegian mountains
howling in midwinter would not be an accordeon in comparison!"

"Wonderful instance of subsidence on a grand scale!" exclaimed the
Captain, hastily relapsing into science.

"Not at all!" cried the Frenchman, still true to his colors; "no
subsidence there! A comet simply came too close and left its mark as it
flew past."

"Fanciful exclamations, dear friends," observed Barbican; "but I'm not
surprised at your excitement. Yonder is the famous _Valley of the Alps_,
a standing enigma to all selenographers. How it could have been formed,
no one can tell. Even wilder guesses than yours, Ardan, have been
hazarded on the subject. All we can state positively at present
regarding this wonderful formation, is what I have just recorded in my
note-book: the _Valley of the Alps_ is about 5 mile wide and 70 or 80
long: it is remarkably flat and free from _debris_, though the mountains
on each side rise like walls to the height of at least 10,000
feet.--Over the whole surface of our Earth I know of no natural
phenomenon that can be at all compared with it."

"Another wonder almost in front of us!" cried Ardan. "I see a vast lake
black as pitch and round as a crater; it is surrounded by such lofty
mountains that their shadows reach clear across, rendering the interior
quite invisible!"

"That's _Plato_;" said M'Nicholl; "I know it well; it's the darkest spot
on the Moon: many a night I gazed at it from my little observatory in
Broad Street, Philadelphia."

"Right, Captain," said Barbican; "the crater _Plato_, is, indeed,
generally considered the blackest spot on the Moon, but I am inclined to
consider the spots _Grimaldi_ and _Riccioli_ on the extreme eastern edge
to be somewhat darker. If you take my glass, Ardan, which is of somewhat
greater power than yours, you will distinctly see the bottom of the
crater. The reflective power of its plateau probably proceeds from the
exceedingly great number of small craters that you can detect there."

"I think I see something like them now," said Ardan. "But I am sorry the
Projectile's course will not give us a vertical view."

"Can't be helped!" said Barbican; "we must go where it takes us. The day
may come when man can steer the projectile or the balloon in which he is
shut up, in any way he pleases, but that day has not come yet!"

Towards five in the morning, the northern limit of _Mare Imbrium_ was
finally passed, and _Mare Frigoris_ spread its frost-colored plains
far to the right and left. On the east the travellers could easily see
the ring-mountain _Condamine_, about 4000 feet high, while a little
ahead on the right they could plainly distinguish _Fontenelle_ with an
altitude nearly twice as great. _Mare Frigoris_ was soon passed, and the
whole lunar surface beneath the travellers, as far as they could see in
all directions, now bristled with mountains, crags, and peaks. Indeed,
at the 70th parallel the "Seas" or plains seem to have come to an end.
The spy-glasses now brought the surface to within about three miles, a
distance less than that between the hotel at Chamouni and the summit of
Mont Blanc. To the left, they had no difficulty in distinguishing the
ramparts of _Philolaus_, about 12,000 feet high, but though the crater
had a diameter of nearly thirty miles, the black shadows prevented the
slightest sign of its interior from being seen. The Sun was now sinking
very low, and the illuminated surface of the Moon was reduced to a
narrow rim.

By this time, too, the bird's eye view to which the observations had so
far principally confined, decidedly altered its character. They could
now look back at the lunar mountains that they had been just sailing
over--a view somewhat like that enjoyed by a tourist standing on the
summit of Mt. St. Gothard as he sees the sun setting behind the peaks of
the Bernese Oberland. The lunar landscapes however, though seen under
these new and ever varying conditions, "hardly gained much by the
change," according to Ardan's expression. On the contrary, they looked,
if possible, more dreary and inhospitable than before.

The Moon having no atmosphere, the benefit of this gaseous envelope in
softening off and nicely shading the approaches of light and darkness,
heat and cold, is never felt on her surface. There, no twilight ever
softly ushers in the brilliant sun, or sweetly heralds the near approach
of night's dark shadow. Night follows day, and day night, with the
startling suddenness of a match struck or a lamp extinguished in a
cavern. Nor can it present any gradual transition from either extreme of
temperature. Hot jumps to cold, and cold jumps to hot. A moment after a
glacial midnight, it is a roasting noon. Without an instant's warning
the temperature falls from 212° Fahrenheit to the icy winter of
interstellar space. The surface is all dazzling glare, or pitchy gloom.
Wherever the direct rays of the sun do not fall, darkness reigns
supreme. What we call diffused light on Earth, the grateful result of
refraction, the luminous matter held in suspension by the air, the
mother of our dawns and our dusks, of our blushing mornings and our dewy
eyes, of our shades, our penumbras, our tints and all the other magical
effects of _chiaro-oscuro_--this diffused light has absolutely no
existence on the surface of the Moon. Nothing is there to break the
inexorable contrast between intense white and intense black. At mid-day,
let a Selenite shade his eyes and look at the sky: it will appear to him
as black as pitch, while the stars still sparkle before him as vividly
as they do to us on the coldest and darkest night in winter.

From this you can judge of the impression made on our travellers by
those strange lunar landscapes. Even their decided novelty and very
strange character produced any thing but a pleasing effect on the organs
of sight. With all their enthusiasm, the travellers felt their eyes "get
out of gear," as Ardan said, like those of a man blind from his birth
and suddenly restored to sight. They could not adjust them so as to be
able to realize the different plains of vision. All things seemed in a
heap. Foreground and background were indistinguishably commingled. No
painter could ever transfer a lunar landscape to his canvas.

"Landscape," Ardan said; "what do you mean by a landscape? Can you call
a bottle of ink intensely black, spilled over a sheet of paper intensely
white, a landscape?"

At the eightieth degree, when the Projectile was hardly 100 miles
distant from the Moon, the aspect of things underwent no improvement. On
the contrary, the nearer the travellers approached the lunar surface,
the drearier, the more inhospitable, and the more _unearthly_,
everything seem to look. Still when five o'clock in the morning brought
our travellers to within 50 miles of _Mount Gioja_--which their
spy-glasses rendered as visible as if it was only about half a mile off,
Ardan could not control himself.

"Why, we're there" he exclaimed; "we can touch her with our hands! Open
the windows and let me out! Don't mind letting me go by myself. It is
not very inviting quarters I admit. But as we are come to the jumping
off place, I want to see the whole thing through. Open the lower window
and let me out. I can take care of myself!"

"That's what's more than any other man can do," said M'Nicholl drily,
"who wants to take a jump of 50 miles!"

"Better not try it, friend Ardan," said Barbican grimly: "think of
Satellite! The Moon is no more attainable by your body than by our
Projectile. You are far more comfortable in here than when floating
about in empty space like a bolide."

Ardan, unwilling to quarrel with his companions, appeared to give in;
but he secretly consoled himself by a hope which he had been
entertaining for some time, and which now looked like assuming the
appearance of a certainty. The Projectile had been lately approaching
the Moon's surface so rapidly that it at last seemed actually impossible
not to finally touch it somewhere in the neighborhood of the north pole,
whose dazzling ridges now presented themselves in sharp and strong
relief against the black sky. Therefore he kept silent, but quietly
bided his time.

The Projectile moved on, evidently getting nearer and nearer to the
lunar surface. The Moon now appeared to the travellers as she does to us
towards the beginning of her Second Quarter, that is as a bright
crescent instead of a hemisphere. On one side, glaring dazzling light;
on the other, cavernous pitchy darkness. The line separating both was
broken into a thousand bits of protuberances and concavities, dented,
notched, and jagged.

At six o'clock the travellers found themselves exactly over the north
pole. They were quietly gazing at the rapidly shifting features of the
wondrous view unrolling itself beneath them, and were silently wondering
what was to come next, when, suddenly, the Projectile passed the
dividing line. The Sun and Moon instantly vanished from view. The next
moment, without the slightest warning the travellers found themselves
plunged in an ocean of the most appalling darkness!




CHAPTER XIV.

A NIGHT OF FIFTEEN DAYS.


The Projectile being not quite 30 miles from the Moon's north pole when
the startling phenomenon, recorded in our last chapter, took place, a
few seconds were quite sufficient to launch it at once from the
brightest day into the unknown realms of night. The transition was so
abrupt, so unexpected, without the slightest shading off, from dazzling
effulgence to Cimmerian gloom, that the Moon seemed to have been
suddenly extinguished like a lamp when the gas is turned off.

"Where's the Moon?" cried Ardan in amazement.

"It appears as if she had been wiped out of creation!" cried M'Nicholl.

Barbican said nothing, but observed carefully. Not a particle, however,
could he see of the disc that had glittered so resplendently before his
eyes a few moments ago. Not a shadow, not a gleam, not the slightest
vestige could he trace of its existence. The darkness being profound,
the dazzling splendor of the stars only gave a deeper blackness to the
pitchy sky. No wonder. The travellers found themselves now in a night
that had plenty of time not only to become black itself, but to steep
everything connected with it in palpable blackness. This was the night
354-1/4 hours long, during which the invisible face of the Moon is
turned away from the Sun. In this black darkness the Projectile now
fully participated. Having plunged into the Moon's shadow, it was as
effectually cut off from the action of the solar rays as was every point
on the invisible lunar surface itself.

The travellers being no longer able to see each other, it was proposed
to light the gas, though such an unexpected demand on a commodity at
once so scarce and so valuable was certainly disquieting. The gas, it
will be remembered, had been intended for heating alone, not
illumination, of which both Sun and Moon had promised a never ending
supply. But here both Sun and Moon, in a single instant vanished from
before their eyes and left them in Stygian darkness.

"It's all the Sun's fault!" cried Ardan, angrily trying to throw the
blame on something, and, like every angry man in such circumstances,
bound to be rather nonsensical.

"Put the saddle on the right horse, Ardan," said M'Nicholl
patronizingly, always delighted at an opportunity of counting a point
off the Frenchman. "You mean it's all the Moon's fault, don't you, in
setting herself like a screen between us and the Sun?"

"No, I don't!" cried Ardan, not at all soothed by his friend's
patronizing tone, and sticking like a man to his first assertion right
or wrong. "I know what I say! It will be all the Sun's fault if we use
up our gas!"

"Nonsense!" said M'Nicholl. "It's the Moon, who by her interposition has
cut off the Sun's light."

"The Sun had no business to allow it to be cut off," said Ardan, still
angry and therefore decidedly loose in his assertions.

Before M'Nicholl could reply, Barbican interposed, and his even voice
was soon heard pouring balm on the troubled waters.

"Dear friends," he observed, "a little reflection on either side would
convince you that our present situation is neither the Moon's fault nor
the Sun's fault. If anything is to be blamed for it, it is our
Projectile which, instead of rigidly following its allotted course, has
awkwardly contrived to deviate from it. However, strict justice must
acquit even the Projectile. It only obeyed a great law of nature in
shifting its course as soon as it came within the sphere of that
inopportune bolide's influence."

"All right!" said Ardan, as usual in the best of humor after Barbican
had laid down the law. "I have no doubt it is exactly as you say; and,
now that all is settled, suppose we take breakfast. After such a hard
night spent in work, a little refreshment would not be out of place!"

Such a proposition being too reasonable even for M'Nicholl to oppose,
Ardan turned on the gas, and had everything ready for the meal in a few
minutes. But, this time, breakfast was consumed in absolute silence. No
toasts were offered, no hurrahs were uttered. A painful uneasiness had
seized the hearts of the daring travellers. The darkness into which
they were so suddenly plunged, told decidedly on their spirits. They
felt almost as if they had been suddenly deprived of their sight. That
thick, dismal savage blackness, which Victor Hugo's pen is so fond of
occasionally revelling in, surrounded them on all sides and crushed them
like an iron shroud.

It was felt worse than ever when, breakfast being over, Ardan carefully
turned off the gas, and everything within the Projectile was as dark as
without. However, though they could not see each other's faces, they
could hear each other's voices, and therefore they soon began to talk.
The most natural subject of conversation was this terrible night 354
hours long, which the laws of nature have imposed on the Lunar
inhabitants. Barbican undertook to give his friends some explanation
regarding the cause of the startling phenomenon, and the consequences
resulting from it.

"Yes, startling is the word for it," observed Barbican, replying to a
remark of Ardan's; "and still more so when we reflect that not only are
both lunar hemispheres deprived, by turns, of sun light for nearly 15
days, but that also the particular hemisphere over which we are at this
moment floating is all that long night completely deprived of
earth-light. In other words, it is only one side of the Moon's disc that
ever receives any light from the Earth. From nearly every portion of one
side of the Moon, the Earth is always as completely absent as the Sun is
from us at midnight. Suppose an analogous case existed on the Earth;
suppose, for instance, that neither in Europe, Asia or North America
was the Moon ever visible--that, in fact, it was to be seen only at our
antipodes. With what astonishment should we contemplate her for the
first time on our arrival in Australia or New Zealand!"

"Every man of us would pack off to Australia to see her!" cried Ardan.

"Yes," said M'Nicholl sententiously; "for a visit to the South Sea a
Turk would willingly forego Mecca; and a Bostonian would prefer Sidney
even to Paris."

"Well," resumed Barbican, "this interesting marvel is reserved for the
Selenite that inhabits the side of the Moon which is always turned away
from our globe."

"And which," added the Captain, "we should have had the unspeakable
satisfaction of contemplating if we had only arrived at the period when
the Sun and the Earth are not at the same side of the Moon--that is, 15
days sooner or later than now."

"For my part, however," continued Barbican, not heeding these
interruptions, "I must confess that, notwithstanding the magnificent
splendor of the spectacle when viewed for the first time by the Selenite
who inhabits the dark side of the Moon, I should prefer to be a resident
on the illuminated side. The former, when his long, blazing, roasting,
dazzling day is over, has a night 354 hours long, whose darkness, like
that, just now surrounding us, is ever unrelieved save by the cold
cheerless rays of the stars. But the latter has hardly seen his fiery
sun sinking on one horizon when he beholds rising on the opposite one an
orb, milder, paler, and colder indeed than the Sun, but fully as large
as thirteen of our full Moons, and therefore shedding thirteen times as
much light. This would be our Earth. It would pass through all its
phases too, exactly like our Satellite. The Selenites would have their
New Earth, Full Earth, and Last Quarter. At midnight, grandly
illuminated, it would shine with the greatest glory. But that is almost
as much as can be said for it. Its futile heat would but poorly
compensate for its superior radiance. All the calorie accumulated in the
lunar soil during the 354 hours day would have by this time radiated
completely into space. An intensity of cold would prevail, in comparison
to which a Greenland winter is tropical. The temperature of interstellar
space, 250° below zero, would be reached. Our Selenite, heartily tired
of the cold pale Earth, would gladly see her sink towards the horizon,
waning as she sank, till at last she appeared no more than half full.
Then suddenly a faint rim of the solar orb reveals itself on the edge of
the opposite sky. Slowly, more than 14 times more slowly than with us,
does the Sun lift himself above the lunar horizon. In half an hour, only
half his disc is revealed, but that is more than enough to flood the
lunar landscape with a dazzling intensity of light, of which we have no
counterpart on Earth. No atmosphere refracts it, no hazy screen softens
it, no enveloping vapor absorbs it, no obstructing medium colors it. It
breaks on the eye, harsh, white, dazzling, blinding, like the electric
light seen a few yards off. As the hours wear away, the more blasting
becomes the glare; and the higher he rises in the black sky, but slowly,
slowly. It takes him seven of our days to reach the meridian. By that
time the heat has increased from an arctic temperature to double the
boiling water point, from 250° below zero to 500° above it, or the point
at which tin melts. Subjected to these extremes, the glassy rocks crack,
shiver and crumble away; enormous land slides occur; peaks topple over;
and tons of debris, crashing down the mountains, are swallowed up
forever in the yawing chasms of the bottomless craters."

"Bravo!" cried Ardan, clapping his hands softly: "our President is
sublime! He reminds me of the overture of _Guillaume Tell_!"

"Souvenir de Marston!" growled M'Nicholl.

"These phenomena," continued Barbican, heedless of interruption and his
voice betraying a slight glow of excitement, "these phenomena going on
without interruption from month to month, from year to year, from age to
age, from _eon_ to _eon_, have finally convinced me that--what?" he
asked his hearers, interrupting himself suddenly.

--"That the existence at the present time--" answered M'Nicholl.

--"Of either animal or vegetable life--" interrupted Ardan.

--"In the Moon is hardly possible!" cried both in one voice.

"Besides?" asked Barbican: "even if there _is_ any life--?"

--"That to live on the dark side would be much more inconvenient than on
the light side!" cried M'Nicholl promptly.

--"That there is no choice between them!" cried Ardan just as ready.
"For my part, I should think a residence on Mt. Erebus or in Grinnell
Land a terrestrial paradise in comparison to either. The _Earth shine_
might illuminate the light side of the Moon a little during the long
night, but for any practical advantage towards heat or life, it would be
perfectly useless!"

"But there is another serious difference between the two sides," said
Barbican, "in addition to those enumerated. The dark side is actually
more troubled with excessive variations of temperature than the light
one."

"That assertion of our worthy President," interrupted Ardan, "with all
possible respect for his superior knowledge, I am disposed to question."

"It's as clear as day!" said Barbican.

"As clear as mud, you mean, Mr. President;" interrupted Ardan, "the
temperature of the light side is excited by two objects at the same
time, the Earth and the Sun, whereas--"

--"I beg your pardon, Ardan--" said Barbican.

--"Granted, dear boy--granted with the utmost pleasure!" interrupted the
Frenchman.

"I shall probably have to direct my observations altogether to you,
Captain," continued Barbican; "friend Michael interrupts me so often
that I'm afraid he can hardly understand my remarks."

"I always admired your candor, Barbican," said Ardan; "it's a noble
quality, a grand quality!"

"Don't mention it," replied Barbican, turning towards M'Nicholl, still
in the dark, and addressing him exclusively; "You see, my dear Captain,
the period at which the Moon's invisible side receives at once its light
and heat is exactly the period of her _conjunction_, that is to say,
when she is lying between the Earth and the Sun. In comparison therefore
with the place which she had occupied at her _opposition_, or when her
visible side was fully illuminated, she is nearer to the Sun by double
her distance from the Earth, or nearly 480 thousand miles. Therefore, my
dear Captain, you can see how when the invisible side of the Moon is
turned towards the Sun, she is nearly half a million of miles nearer to
him than she had been before. Therefore, her heat should be so much the
greater."

"I see it at a glance," said the Captain.

"Whereas--" continued Barbican.

"One moment!" cried Ardan.

"Another interruption!" exclaimed Barbican; "What is the meaning of it,
Sir?"

"I ask my honorable friend the privilege of the floor for one moment,"
cried Ardan.

"What for?"

"To continue the explanation."

"Why so?"

"To show that I can understand as well as interrupt!"

"You have the floor!" exclaimed Barbican, in a voice no longer showing
any traces of ill humor.

"I expected no less from the honorable gentleman's well known courtesy,"
replied Ardan. Then changing his manner and imitating to the life
Barbican's voice, articulation, and gestures, he continued: "Whereas,
you see, my dear Captain, the period at which the Moon's visible side
receives at once its light and heat, is exactly the period of her
_opposition_, that is to say, when she is lying on one side of the Earth
and the Sun at the other. In comparison therefore with the point which
she had occupied in _conjunction_, or when her invisible side was fully
illuminated, she is farther from the Sun by double her distance from the
Earth, or nearly 480,000 miles. Therefore, my dear Captain, you can
readily see how when the Moon's invisible side is turned _from_ the Sun,
she is nearly half a million miles further from him than she had been
before. Therefore her heat should be so much the less."

"Well done, friend Ardan!" cried Barbican, clapping his hands with
pleasure. "Yes, Captain, he understood it as well as either of us the
whole time. Intelligence, not indifference, caused him to interrupt.
Wonderful fellow!"

"That's the kind of a man I am!" replied Ardan, not without some degree
of complacency. Then he added simply: "Barbican, my friend, if I
understand your explanations so readily, attribute it all to their
astonishing lucidity. If I have any faculity, it is that of being able
to scent common sense at the first glimmer. Your sentences are so
steeped in it that I catch their full meaning long before you end
them--hence my apparent inattention. But we're not yet done with the
visible face of the Moon: it seems to me you have not yet enumerated all
the advantages in which it surpasses the other side."

"Another of these advantages," continued Barbican, "is that it is from
the visible side alone that eclipses of the Sun can be seen. This is
self-evident, the interposition of the Earth being possible only between
this visible face and the Sun. Furthermore, such eclipses of the Sun
would be of a far more imposing character than anything of the kind to
be witnessed from our Earth. This is chiefly for two reasons: first,
when we, terrestrians, see the Sun eclipsed, we notice that, the discs
of the two orbs being of about the same apparent size, one cannot hide
the other except for a short time; second, as the two bodies are moving
in opposite directions, the total duration of the eclipse, even under
the most favorable circumstances, can't last longer than 7 minutes.
Whereas to a Selenite who sees the Earth eclipse the Sun, not only does
the Earth's disc appear four times larger than the Sun's, but also, as
his day is 14 times longer than ours, the two heavenly bodies must
remain several hours in contact. Besides, notwithstanding the apparent
superiority of the Earth's disc, the refracting power of the atmosphere
will never allow the Sun to be eclipsed altogether. Even when completely
screened by the Earth, he would form a beautiful circle around her of
yellow, red, and crimson light, in which she would appear to float like
a vast sphere of jet in a glowing sea of gold, rubies, sparkling
carbuncles and garnets."

"It seems to me," said M'Nicholl, "that, taking everything into
consideration, the invisible side has been rather shabbily treated."

"I know I should not stay there very long," said Ardan; "the desire of
seeing such a splendid sight as that eclipse would be enough to bring me
to the visible side as soon as possible."

"Yes, I have no doubt of that, friend Michael," pursued Barbican; "but
to see the eclipse it would not be necessary to quit the dark hemisphere
altogether. You are, of course, aware that in consequence of her
librations, or noddings, or wobblings, the Moon presents to the eyes of
the Earth a little more than the exact half of her disc. She has two
motions, one on her path around the Earth, and the other a shifting
around on her own axis by which she endeavors to keep the same side
always turned towards our sphere. This she cannot always do, as while
one motion, the latter, is strictly uniform, the other being eccentric,
sometimes accelerating her and sometimes retarding, she has not time to
shift herself around completely and with perfect correspondence of
movement. At her perigee, for instance, she moves forward quicker than
she can shift, so that we detect a portion of her western border before
she has time to conceal it. Similarly, at her apogee, when her rate of
motion is comparatively slow, she shifts a little too quickly for her
velocity, and therefore cannot help revealing a certain portion of her
eastern border. She shows altogether about 8 degrees of the dark side,
about 4 at the east and 4 at the west, so that, out of her 360 degrees,
about 188, in other words, a little more than 57 per cent., about 4/7 of
the entire surface, becomes visible to human eyes. Consequently a
Selenite could catch an occasional glimpse of our Earth, without
altogether quitting the dark side."

"No matter for that!" cried Ardan; "if we ever become Selenites we must
inhabit the visible side. My weak point is light, and that I must have
when it can be got."

"Unless, as perhaps in this case, you might be paying too dear for it,"
observed M'Nicholl. "How would you like to pay for your light by the
loss of the atmosphere, which, according to some philosophers, is piled
away on the dark side?"

"Ah! In that case I should consider a little before committing myself,"
replied Ardan, "I should like to hear your opinion regarding such a
notion, Barbican. Hey! Do your hear? Have astronomers any valid reasons
for supposing the atmosphere to have fled to the dark side of the Moon?"

"Defer that question till some other time, Ardan," whispered M'Nicholl;
"Barbican is just now thinking out something that interests him far more
deeply than any empty speculation of astronomers. If you are near the
window, look out through it towards the Moon. Can you see anything?"

"I can feel the window with my hand; but for all I can see, I might as
well be over head and ears in a hogshead of ink."

The two friends kept up a desultory conversation, but Barbican did not
hear them. One fact, in particular, troubled him, and he sought in vain
to account for it. Having come so near the Moon--about 30 miles--why had
not the Projectile gone all the way? Had its velocity been very great,
the tendency to fall could certainly be counteracted. But the velocity
being undeniably very moderate, how explain such a decided resistance to
Lunar attraction? Had the Projectile come within the sphere of some
strange unknown influence? Did the neighborhood of some mysterious body
retain it firmly imbedded in ether? That it would never reach the Moon,
was now beyond all doubt; but where was it going? Nearer to her or
further off? Or was it rushing resistlessly into infinity on the wings
of that pitchy night? Who could tell, know, calculate--who could even
guess, amid the horror of this gloomy blackness? Questions, like these,
left Barbican no rest; in vain he tried to grapple with them; he felt
like a child before them, baffled and almost despairing.

In fact, what could be more tantalizing? Just outside their windows,
only a few leagues off, perhaps only a few miles, lay the radiant planet
of the night, but in every respect as far off from the eyes of himself
and his companions as if she was hiding at the other side of Jupiter!
And to their ears she was no nearer. Earthquakes of the old Titanic type
might at that very moment be upheaving her surface with resistless
force, crashing mountain against mountain as fiercely as wave meets wave
around the storm-lashed cliffs of Cape Horn. But not the faintest far
off murmur even of such a mighty tumult could break the dead brooding
silence that surrounded the travellers. Nay, the Moon, realizing the
weird fancy of the Arabian poet, who calls her a "giant stiffening into
granite, but struggling madly against his doom," might shriek, in a
spasm of agony, loudly enough to be heard in Sirius. But our travellers
could not hear it. Their ears no sound could now reach. They could no
more detect the rending of a continent than the falling of a feather.
Air, the propagator and transmitter of sound, was absent from her
surface. Her cries, her struggles, her groans, were all smothered
beneath the impenetrable tomb of eternal silence!

These were some of the fanciful ideas by which Ardan tried to amuse his
companions in the present unsatisfactory state of affairs. His efforts,
however well meant, were not successful. M'Nicholl's growls were more
savage than usual, and even Barbican's patience was decidedly giving
way. The loss of the other face they could have easily borne--with most
of its details they had been already familiar. But, no, it must be the
dark face that now escaped their observation! The very one that for
numberless reasons they were actually dying to see! They looked out of
the windows once more at the black Moon beneath them.

There it lay below them, a round black spot, hiding the sweet faces of
the stars, but otherwise no more distinguishable by the travellers than
if they were lying in the depths of the Mammoth Cave of Kentucky. And
just think. Only fifteen days before, that dark face had been splendidly
illuminated by the solar beams, every crater lustrous, every peak
sparkling, every streak glistening under the vertical ray. In fifteen
days later, a day light the most brilliant would have replaced a
midnight the most Cimmerian. But in fifteen days later, where would the
Projectile be? In what direction would it have been drawn by the forces
innumerable of attractions incalculable? To such a question as this,
even Ardan would reply only by an ominous shake of the head.

We know already that our travellers, as well as astronomers generally,
judging from that portion of the dark side occasionally revealed by the
Moon's librations, were _pretty certain_ that there is no great
difference between her two sides, as far as regards their physical
constitutions. This portion, about the seventh part, shows plains and
mountains, circles and craters, all of precisely the same nature as
those already laid down on the chart. Judging therefore from analogy,
the other three-sevenths are, in all probability a world in every
respect exactly like the visible face--that is, arid, desert, dead. But
our travellers also knew that _pretty certain_ is far from _quite
certain_, and that arguing merely from analogy may enable you to give a
good guess, but can never lead you to an undoubted conclusion. What if
the atmosphere had really withdrawn to this dark face? And if air, why
not water? Would not this be enough to infuse life into the whole
continent? Why should not vegetation flourish on its plains, fish in its
seas, animals in its forests, and man in every one of its zones that
were capable of sustaining life? To these interesting questions, what a
satisfaction it would be to be able to answer positively one way or
another! For thousands of difficult problems a mere glimpse at this
hemisphere would be enough to furnish a satisfactory reply. How glorious
it would be to contemplate a realm on which the eye of man has never yet
rested!

Great, therefore, as you may readily conceive, was the depression of our
travellers' spirits, as they pursued their way, enveloped in a veil of
darkness the most profound. Still even then Ardan, as usual, formed
somewhat of an exception. Finding it impossible to see a particle of the
Lunar surface, he gave it up for good, and tried to console himself by
gazing at the stars, which now fairly blazed in the spangled heavens.
And certainly never before had astronomer enjoyed an opportunity for
gazing at the heavenly bodies under such peculiar advantages. How Fraye
of Paris, Chacornac of Lyons, and Father Secchi of Rome would have
envied him!

For, candidly and truly speaking, never before had mortal eye revelled
on such a scene of starry splendor. The black sky sparkled with lustrous
fires, like the ceiling of a vast hall of ebony encrusted with flashing
diamonds. Ardan's eye could take in the whole extent in an easy sweep
from the _Southern Cross_ to the _Little Bear_, thus embracing within
one glance not only the two polar stars of the present day, but also
_Campus_ and _Vega_, which, by reason of the _precession of the
Equinoxes_, are to be our polar stars 12,000 years hence. His
imagination, as if intoxicated, reeled wildly through these sublime
infinitudes and got lost in them. He forgot all about himself and all
about his companions. He forgot even the strangeness of the fate that
had sent them wandering through these forbidden regions, like a
bewildered comet that had lost its way. With what a soft sweet light
every star glowed! No matter what its magnitude, the stream that flowed
from it looked calm and holy. No twinkling, no scintillation, no
nictitation, disturbed their pure and lambent gleam. No atmosphere here
interposed its layers of humidity or of unequal density to interrupt the
stately majesty of their effulgence. The longer he gazed upon them, the
more absorbing became their attraction. He felt that they were great
kindly eyes looking down even yet with benevolence and protection on
himself and his companions now driving wildly through space, and lost
in the pathless depths of the black ocean of infinity!

He soon became aware that his friends, following his example, had
interested themselves in gazing at the stars, and were now just as
absorbed as himself in the contemplation of the transcendent spectacle.
For a long time all three continued to feast their eyes on all the
glories of the starry firmament; but, strange to say, the part that
seemed to possess the strangest and weirdest fascination for their
wandering glances was the spot where the vast disc of the Moon showed
like an enormous round hole, black and soundless, and apparently deep
enough to permit a glance into the darkest mysteries of the infinite.

A disagreeable sensation, however, against which they had been for some
time struggling, at last put an end to their contemplations, and
compelled them to think of themselves. This was nothing less than a
pretty sharp cold, at first somewhat endurable, but which soon covered
the inside surface of the window panes with a thick coating of ice. The
fact was that, the Sun's direct rays having no longer an opportunity of
warming up the Projectile, the latter began to lose rapidly by radiation
whatever heat it had stored away within its walls. The consequence was a
very decided falling of the thermometer, and so thick a condensation of
the internal moisture on the window glasses as to soon render all
external observations extremely difficult, if not actually impossible.

The Captain, as the oldest man in the party, claimed the privilege of
saying he could stand it no longer. Striking a light, he consulted the
thermometer and cried out:

"Seventeen degrees below zero, centigrade! that is certainly low enough
to make an old fellow like me feel rather chilly!"

"Just one degree and a half above zero, Fahrenheit!" observed Barbican;
"I really had no idea that it was so cold."

His teeth actually chattered so much that he could hardly articulate;
still he, as well as the others, disliked to entrench on their short
supply of gas.

"One feature of our journey that I particularly admire," said Ardan,
trying to laugh with freezing lips, "is that we can't complain of
monotony. At one time we are frying with the heat and blinded with the
light, like Indians caught on a burning prairie; at another, we are
freezing in the pitchy darkness of a hyperborean winter, like Sir John
Franklin's merry men in the Bay of Boothia. _Madame La Nature_, you
don't forget your devotees; on the contrary, you overwhelm us with your
attentions!"

"Our external temperature may be reckoned at how much?" asked the
Captain, making a desperate effort to keep up the conversation.

"The temperature outside our Projectile must be precisely the same as
that of interstellar space in general," answered Barbican.

"Is not this precisely the moment then," interposed Ardan, quickly,
"for making an experiment which we could never have made as long as we
were in the sunshine?"

"That's so!" exclaimed Barbican; "now or never! I'm glad you thought of
it, Ardan. We are just now in the position to find out the temperature
of space by actual experiment, and so see whose calculations are right,
Fourier's or Pouillet's."

"Let's see," asked Ardan, "who was Fourier, and who was Pouillet?"

"Baron Fourier, of the French Academy, wrote a famous treatise on
_Heat_, which I remember reading twenty years ago in Penington's book
store," promptly responded the Captain; "Pouillet was an eminent
professor of Physics at the Sorbonne, where he died, last year, I
think."

"Thank you, Captain," said Ardan; "the cold does not injure your memory,
though it is decidedly on the advance. See how thick the ice is already
on the window panes! Let it only keep on and we shall soon have our
breaths falling around us in flakes of snow."

"Let us prepare a thermometer," said Barbican, who had already set
himself to work in a business-like manner.

A thermometer of the usual kind, as may be readily supposed, would be of
no use whatever in the experiment that was now about to be made. In an
ordinary thermometer Mercury freezes hard when exposed to a temperature
of 40° below zero. But Barbican had provided himself with a _Minimum_,
_self-recording_ thermometer, of a peculiar nature, invented by
Wolferdin, a friend of Arago's, which could correctly register
exceedingly low degrees of temperature. Before beginning the experiment,
this instrument was tested by comparison with one of the usual kind, and
then Barbican hesitated a few moments regarding the best means of
employing it.

"How shall we start this experiment?" asked the Captain.

"Nothing simpler," answered Ardan, always ready to reply; "you just open
your windows, and fling out your thermometer. It follows your
Projectile, as a calf follows her mother. In a quarter of an hour you
put out your hand--"

"Put out your hand!" interrupted Barbican.

"Put out your hand--" continued Ardan, quietly.

"You do nothing of the kind," again interrupted Barbican; "that is,
unless you prefer, instead of a hand, to pull back a frozen stump,
shapeless, colorless and lifeless!"

"I prefer a hand," said Ardan, surprised and interested.

"Yes," continued Barbican, "the instant your hand left the Projectile,
it would experience the same terrible sensations as is produced by
cauterizing it with an iron bar white hot. For heat, whether rushing
rapidly out of our bodies or rapidly entering them, is identically the
same force and does the same amount of damage. Besides I am by no means
certain that we are still followed by the objects that we flung out of
the Projectile."

"Why not?" asked M'Nicholl; "we saw them all outside not long ago."

"But we can't see them outside now," answered Barbican; "that may be
accounted for, I know, by the darkness, but it may be also by the fact
of their not being there at all. In a case like this, we can't rely on
uncertainties. Therefore, to make sure of not losing our thermometer, we
shall fasten it with a string and easily pull it in whenever we like."

This advice being adopted, the window was opened quickly, and the
instrument was thrown out at once by M'Nicholl, who held it fastened by
a short stout cord so that it could be pulled in immediately. The window
had hardly been open for longer than a second, yet that second had been
enough to admit a terrible icy chill into the interior of the
Projectile.

"Ten thousand ice-bergs!" cried Ardan, shivering all over; "it's cold
enough to freeze a white bear!"

Barbican waited quietly for half an hour; that time he considered quite
long enough to enable the instrument to acquire the temperature of the
interstellar space. Then he gave the signal, and it was instantly pulled
in.

It took him a few moments to calculate the quantity of mercury that had
escaped into the little diaphragm attached to the lower part of the
instrument; then he said:

"A hundred and forty degrees, centigrade, below zero!"

[Illustration: IT'S COLD ENOUGH TO FREEZE A WHITE BEAR.]

"Two hundred and twenty degrees, Fahrenheit, below zero!" cried
M'Nicholl; "no wonder that we should feel a little chilly!"

"Pouillet is right, then," said Barbican, "and Fourier wrong."

"Another victory for Sorbonne over the Academy!" cried Ardan. "_Vive la
Sorbonne!_ Not that I'm a bit proud of finding myself in the midst of a
temperature so very _distingué_--though it is more than three times
colder than Hayes ever felt it at Humboldt Glacier or Nevenoff at
Yakoutsk. If Madame the Moon becomes as cold as this every time that her
surface is withdrawn from the sunlight for fourteen days, I don't think,
boys, that her hospitality is much to hanker after!"




CHAPTER XV.

GLIMPSES AT THE INVISIBLE.


In spite of the dreadful condition in which the three friends now found
themselves, and the still more dreadful future that awaited them, it
must be acknowledged that Ardan bravely kept up his spirits. And his
companions were just as cheerful. Their philosophy was quite simple and
perfectly intelligible. What they could bear, they bore without
murmuring. When it became unbearable, they only complained, if
complaining would do any good. Imprisoned in an iron shroud, flying
through profound darkness into the infinite abysses of space, nearly a
quarter million of miles distant from all human aid, freezing with the
icy cold, their little stock not only of gas but of _air_ rapidly
running lower and lower, a near future of the most impenetrable
obscurity looming up before them, they never once thought of wasting
time in asking such useless questions as where they were going, or what
fate was about to befall them. Knowing that no good could possibly
result from inaction or despair, they carefully kept their wits about
them, making their experiments and recording their observations as
calmly and as deliberately as if they were working at home in the quiet
retirement of their own cabinets.

Any other course of action, however, would have been perfectly absurd
on their part, and this no one knew better than themselves. Even if
desirous to act otherwise, what could they have done? As powerless over
the Projectile as a baby over a locomotive, they could neither clap
brakes to its movement nor switch off its direction. A sailor can turn
his ship's head at pleasure; an aeronaut has little trouble, by means of
his ballast and his throttle-valve, in giving a vertical movement to his
balloon. But nothing of this kind could our travellers attempt. No helm,
or ballast, or throttle-valve could avail them now. Nothing in the world
could be done to prevent things from following their own course to the
bitter end.

If these three men would permit themselves to hazard an expression at
all on the subject, which they didn't, each could have done it by his
own favorite motto, so admirably expressive of his individual nature.
"_Donnez tête baissée!_" (Go it baldheaded!) showed Ardan's
uncalculating impetuosity and his Celtic blood. "_Fata quocunque
vocant!_" (To its logical consequence!) revealed Barbican's
imperturbable stoicism, culture hardening rather than loosening the
original British phlegm. Whilst M'Nicholl's "Screw down the valve and
let her rip!" betrayed at once his unconquerable Yankee coolness and his
old experiences as a Western steamboat captain.

Where were they now, at eight o'clock in the morning of the day called
in America the sixth of December? Near the Moon, very certainly; near
enough, in fact, for them to perceive easily in the dark the great round
screen which she formed between themselves and the Projectile on one
side, and the Earth, Sun, and stars on the other. But as to the exact
distance at which she lay from them--they had no possible means of
calculating it. The Projectile, impelled and maintained by forces
inexplicable and even incomprehensible, had come within less than thirty
miles from the Moon's north pole. But during those two hours of
immersion in the dark shadow, had this distance been increased or
diminished? There was evidently no stand-point whereby to estimate
either the Projectile's direction or its velocity. Perhaps, moving
rapidly away from the Moon, it would be soon out of her shadow
altogether. Perhaps, on the contrary, gradually approaching her surface,
it might come into contact at any moment with some sharp invisible peak
of the Lunar mountains--a catastrophe sure to put a sudden end to the
trip, and the travellers too.

An excited discussion on this subject soon sprang up, in which all
naturally took part. Ardan's imagination as usual getting the better of
his reason, he maintained very warmly that the Projectile, caught and
retained by the Moon's attraction, could not help falling on her
surface, just as an aerolite cannot help falling on our Earth.

"Softly, dear boy, softly," replied Barbican; "aerolites _can_ help
falling on the Earth, and the proof is, that few of them _do_ fall--most
of them don't. Therefore, even granting that we had already assumed the
nature of an aerolite, it does not necessarily follow that we should
fall on the Moon."

"But," objected Ardan, "if we approach only near enough, I don't see how
we can help--"

"You don't see, it may be," said Barbican, "but you can see, if you only
reflect a moment. Have you not often seen the November meteors, for
instance, streaking the skies, thousands at a time?"

"Yes; on several occasions I was so fortunate."

"Well, did you ever see any of them strike the Earth's surface?" asked
Barbican.

"I can't say I ever did," was the candid reply, "but--"

"Well, these shooting stars," continued Barbican, "or rather these
wandering particles of matter, shine only from being inflamed by the
friction of the atmosphere. Therefore they can never be at a greater
distance from the Earth than 30 or 40 miles at furthest, and yet they
seldom fall on it. So with our Projectile. It may go very close to the
Moon without falling into it."

"But our roving Projectile must pull up somewhere in the long run,"
replied Ardan, "and I should like to know where that somewhere can be,
if not in the Moon."

"Softly again, dear boy," said Barbican; "how do you know that our
Projectile must pull up somewhere?"

"It's self-evident," replied Ardan; "it can't keep moving for ever."

"Whether it can or it can't depends altogether on which one of two
mathematical curves it has followed in describing its course. According
to the velocity with which it was endowed at a certain moment, it must
follow either the one or the other; but this velocity I do not consider
myself just now able to calculate."

"Exactly so," chimed in M'Nicholl; "it must describe and keep on
describing either a parabola or a hyperbola."

"Precisely," said Barbican; "at a certain velocity it would take a
parabolic curve; with a velocity considerably greater it should describe
a hyperbolic curve."

"I always did like nice corpulent words," said Ardan, trying to laugh;
"bloated and unwieldy, they express in a neat handy way exactly what you
mean. Of course, I know all about the high--high--those high curves, and
those low curves. No matter. Explain them to me all the same. Consider
me most deplorably ignorant on the nature of these curves."

"Well," said the Captain, a little bumptiously, "a parabola is a curve
of the second order, formed by the intersection of a cone by a plane
parallel to one of its sides."

"You don't say so!" cried Ardan, with mouth agape. "Do tell!"

"It is pretty nearly the path taken by a shell shot from a mortar."

"Well now!" observed Ardan, apparently much surprised; "who'd have
thought it? Now for the high--high--bully old curve!"

"The hyperbola," continued the Captain, not minding Ardan's antics, "the
hyperbola is a curve of the second order, formed from the intersection
of a cone by a plane parallel to its axis, or rather parallel to its two
_generatrices_, constituting two separate branches, extending
indefinitely in both directions."

"Oh, what an accomplished scientist I'm going to turn out, if only left
long enough at your feet, illustrious _maestro_!" cried Ardan, with
effusion. "Only figure it to yourselves, boys; before the Captain's
lucid explanations, I fully expected to hear something about the high
curves and the low curves in the back of an Ancient Thomas! Oh, Michael,
Michael, why didn't you know the Captain earlier?"

But the Captain was now too deeply interested in a hot discussion with
Barbican to notice that the Frenchman was only funning him. Which of the
two curves had been the one most probably taken by the Projectile?
Barbican maintained it was the parabolic; M'Nicholl insisted that it was
the hyperbolic. Their tempers were not improved by the severe cold, and
both became rather excited in the dispute. They drew so many lines on
the table, and crossed them so often with others, that nothing was left
at last but a great blot. They covered bits of paper with _x_'s and
_y_'s, which they read out like so many classic passages, shouting them,
declaiming them, drawing attention to the strong points by gesticulation
so forcible and voice so loud that neither of the disputants could hear
a word that the other said. Possibly the very great difference in
temperature between the external air in contact with their skin and the
blood coursing through their veins, had given rise to magnetic currents
as potential in their effects as a superabundant supply of oxygen. At
all events, the language they soon began to employ in the enforcement of
their arguments fairly made the Frenchman's hair stand on end.

"You probably forget the important difference between a _directrix_ and
an _axis_," hotly observed Barbican.

"I know what an _abscissa_ is, any how!" cried the Captain. "Can you say
as much?"

"Did you ever understand what is meant by a _double ordinate_?" asked
Barbican, trying to keep cool.

"More than you ever did about a _transverse_ and a _conjugate!_" replied
the Captain, with much asperity.

"Any one not convinced at a glance that this _eccentricity_ is equal to
_unity_, must be blind as a bat!" exclaimed Barbican, fast losing his
ordinary urbanity.

"_Less_ than _unity_, you mean! If you want spectacles, here are mine!"
shouted the Captain, angrily tearing them off and offering them to his
adversary.

"Dear boys!" interposed Ardan--

--"The _eccentricity_ is _equal_ to _unity_!" cried Barbican.

--"The _eccentricity_ is _less_ than _unity_!" screamed M'Nicholl.

"Talking of eccentricity--" put in Ardan.

--"Therefore it's a _parabola_, and must be!" cried Barbican,
triumphantly.

--"Therefore it's _hyperbola_ and nothing shorter!" was the Captain's
quite as confident reply.

"For gracious sake!--" resumed Ardan.

"Then produce your _asymptote_!" exclaimed Barbican, with an angry
sneer.

"Let us see the _symmetrical point_!" roared the Captain, quite
savagely.

"Dear boys! old fellows!--" cried Ardan, as loud as his lungs would let
him.

"It's useless to argue with a Mississippi steamboat Captain," ejaculated
Barbican; "he never gives in till he blows up!"

"Never try to convince a Yankee schoolmaster," replied M'Nicholl; "he
has one book by heart and don't believe in any other!"

"Here, friend Michael, get me a cord, won't you? It's the only way to
convince him!" cried Barbican, hastily turning to the Frenchman.

"Hand me over that ruler, Ardan!" yelled the Captain. "The heavy one!
It's the only way now left to bring him to reason!"

"Look here, Barbican and M'Nicholl!" cried Ardan, at last making himself
heard, and keeping a tight hold both on the cord and the ruler. "This
thing has gone far enough! Come. Stop your talk, and answer me a few
questions. What do you want of this cord, Barbican?"

"To describe a parabolic curve!"

"And what are you going to do with the ruler, M'Nicholl!"

"To help draw a true hyperbola!"

"Promise me, Barbican, that you're not going to lasso the Captain!"

"Lasso the Captain! Ha! ha! ha!"

"You promise, M'Nicholl, that you're not going to brain the President!"

"I brain the President! Ho! ho! ho!"

"I want merely to convince him that it is a parabola!"

"I only want to make it clear as day that it is hyperbola!"

"Does it make any real difference whether it is one or the other?"
yelled Ardan.

"The greatest possible difference--in the Eye of Science."

"A radical and incontrovertible difference--in the Eye of Science!"

"Oh! Hang the Eye of Science--will either curve take us to the Moon?"

"No!"

"Will either take us back to the Earth?"

"No!"

"Will either take us anywhere that you know of?"

"No!"

"Why not?"

"Because they are both _open_ curves, and therefore can never end!"

"Is it of the slightest possible importance which of the two curves
controls the Projectile?"

"Not the slightest--except in the Eye of Science!"

"Then let the Eye of Science and her parabolas and hyperbolas, and
conjugates, and asymptotes, and the rest of the confounded nonsensical
farrago, all go to pot! What's the use of bothering your heads about
them here! Have you not enough to trouble you otherwise? A nice pair of
scientists you are? 'Stanislow' scientists, probably. Do _real_
scientists lose their tempers for a trifle? Am I ever to see my ideal of
a true scientific man in the flesh? Barbican came very near realizing my
idea perfectly; but I see that Science just has as little effect as
Culture in driving the Old Adam out of us! The idea of the only
simpleton in the lot having to lecture the others on propriety of
deportment! I thought they were going to tear each other's eyes out! Ha!
Ha! Ha! It's _impayable_! Give me that cord, Michael! Hand me the heavy
ruler, Ardan! It's the only way to bring him to reason! Ho! Ho! Ho! It's
too good! I shall never get over it!" and he laughed till his sides
ached and his cheeks streamed.

His laughter was so contagious, and his merriment so genuine, that there
was really no resisting it, and the next few minutes witnessed nothing
but laughing, and handshaking and rib-punching in the Projectile--though
Heaven knows there was very little for the poor fellows to be merry
about. As they could neither reach the Moon nor return to the Earth,
what _was_ to befall them? The immediate outlook was the very reverse of
exhilarating. If they did not die of hunger, if they did not die of
thirst, the reason would simply be that, in a few days, as soon as their
gas was exhausted, they would die for want of air, unless indeed the icy
cold had killed them beforehand!

By this time, in fact, the temperature had become so exceedingly cold
that a further encroachment on their little stock of gas could be put
off no longer. The light, of course, they could manage to do without;
but a little heat was absolutely necessary to prevent them from freezing
to death. Fortunately, however, the caloric developed by the Reiset and
Regnault process for purifying the air, raised the internal temperature
of the Projectile a little, so that, with an expenditure of gas much
less than they had expected, our travellers were able to maintain it at
a degree capable of sustaining human life.

By this time, also, all observations through the windows had become
exceedingly difficult. The internal moisture condensed so thick and
congealed so hard on the glass that nothing short of continued friction
could keep up its transparency. But this friction, however laborious
they might regard it at other times, they thought very little of just
now, when observation had become far more interesting and important than
ever.

If the Moon had any atmosphere, our travellers were near enough now to
strike any meteor that might be rushing through it. If the Projectile
itself were floating in it, as was possible, would not such a good
conductor of sound convey to their ears the reflexion of some lunar
echo, the roar of some storm raging among the mountains, the rattling of
some plunging avalanche, or the detonations of some eructating volcano?
And suppose some lunar Etna or Vesuvius was flashing out its fires, was
it not even possible that their eye could catch a glimpse of the lurid
gleam? One or two facts of this kind, well attested, would singularly
elucidate the vexatious question of a lunar atmosphere, which is still
so far from being decided. Full of such thoughts and intensely
interested in them, Barbican, M'Nicholl and Ardan, patient as
astronomers at a transit of Venus, watched steadily at their windows,
and allowed nothing worth noticing to escape their searching gaze.

Ardan's patience first gave out. He showed it by an observation natural
enough, for that matter, to a mind unaccustomed to long stretches of
careful thought:

"This darkness is absolutely killing! If we ever take this trip again,
it must be about the time of the New Moon!"

"There I agree with you, Ardan," observed the Captain. "That would be
just the time to start. The Moon herself, I grant, would be lost in the
solar rays and therefore invisible all the time of our trip, but in
compensation, we should have the Full Earth in full view. Besides--and
this is your chief point, no doubt, Ardan--if we should happen to be
drawn round the Moon, just as we are at the present moment, we should
enjoy the inestimable advantage of beholding her invisible side
magnificently illuminated!"

"My idea exactly, Captain," said Ardan. "What is your opinion on this
point, Barbican?"

"My opinion is as follows:" answered Barbican, gravely. "If we ever
repeat this journey, we shall start precisely at the same time and under
precisely the same circumstances. You forget that our only object is to
reach the Moon. Now suppose we had really landed there, as we expected
to do yesterday, would it not have been much more agreeable to behold
the lunar continents enjoying the full light of day than to find them
plunged in the dismal obscurity of night? Would not our first
installation of discovery have been under circumstances decidedly
extremely favorable? Your silence shows that you agree with me. As to
the invisible side, once landed, we should have the power to visit it
when we pleased, and therefore we could always choose whatever time
would best suit our purpose. Therefore, if we wanted to land in the
Moon, the period of the Full Moon was the best period to select. The
period was well chosen, the time was well calculated, the force was well
applied, the Projectile was well aimed, but missing our way spoiled
everything."

"That's sound logic, no doubt," said Ardan; "still I can't help thinking
that all for want of a little light we are losing, probably forever, a
splendid opportunity of seeing the Moon's invisible side. How about the
other planets, Barbican? Do you think that their inhabitants are as
ignorant regarding their satellites as we are regarding ours?"

"On that subject," observed M'Nicholl, "I could venture an answer
myself, though, of course, without pretending to speak dogmatically on
any such open question. The satellites of the other planets, by their
comparative proximity, must be much easier to study than our Moon. The
Saturnians, the Uranians, the Jovians, cannot have had very serious
difficulty in effecting some communication with their satellites.
Jupiter's four moons, for instance, though on an average actually 2-1/2
times farther from their planet's centre than the Moon is from us, are
comparatively four times nearer to him on account of his radius being
eleven times greater than the Earth's. With Saturn's eight moons, the
case is almost precisely similar. Their average distance is nearly three
times greater than that of our Moon; but as Saturn's diameter is about 9
times greater than the Earth's, his bodyguards are really between 3 and
4 times nearer to their principal than ours is to us. As to Uranus, his
first satellite, _Ariel_, half as far from him as our Moon is from the
Earth, is comparatively, though not actually, eight times nearer."

"Therefore," said Barbican, now taking up the subject, "an experiment
analogous to ours, starting from either of these three planets, would
have encountered fewer difficulties. But the whole question resolves
itself into this. _If_ the Jovians and the rest have been able to quit
their planets, they have probably succeeded in discovering the invisible
sides of their satellites. But if they have _not_ been able to do so,
why, they're not a bit wiser than ourselves--But what's the matter with
the Projectile? It's certainly shifting!"

Shifting it certainly was. While the path it described as it swung
blindly through the darkness, could not be laid down by any chart for
want of a starting point, Barbican and his companions soon became aware
of a decided modification of its relative position with regard to the
Moon's surface. Instead of its side, as heretofore, it now presented its
base to the Moon's disc, and its axis had become rigidly vertical to the
lunar horizon. Of this new feature in their journey, Barbican had
assured himself by the most undoubted proof towards four o'clock in the
morning. What was the cause? Gravity, of course. The heavier portion of
the Projectile gravitated towards the Moon's centre exactly as if they
were falling towards her surface.

But _were_ they falling? Were they at last, contrary to all
expectations, about to reach the goal that they had been so ardently
wishing for? No! A sight-point, just discovered by M'Nicholl, very soon
convinced Barbican that the Projectile was as far as ever from
approaching the Moon, but was moving around it in a curve pretty near
concentric.

M'Nicholl's discovery, a luminous gleam flickering on the distant verge
of the black disc, at once engrossed the complete attention of our
travellers and set them to divining its course. It could not possibly be
confounded with a star. Its glare was reddish, like that of a distant
furnace on a dark night; it kept steadily increasing in size and
brightness, thus showing beyond a doubt how the Projectile was
moving--in the direction of the luminous point, and _not_ vertically
falling towards the Moon's surface.

"It's a volcano!" cried the Captain, in great excitement; "a volcano in
full blast! An outlet of the Moon's internal fires! Therefore she can't
be a burnt out cinder!"

"It certainly looks like a volcano," replied Barbican, carefully
investigating this new and puzzling phenomenon with his night-glass. "If
it is not one, in fact, what can it be?"

"To maintain combustion," commenced Ardan syllogistically and
sententiously, "air is necessary. An undoubted case of combustion lies
before us. Therefore, this part of the Moon _must_ have an atmosphere!"

"Perhaps so," observed Barbican, "but not necessarily so. The volcano,
by decomposing certain substances, gunpowder for instance, may be able
to furnish its own oxygen, and thus explode in a vacuum. That blaze, in
fact, seems to me to possess the intensity and the blinding glare of
objects burning in pure oxygen. Let us therefore be not over hasty in
jumping at the conclusion of the existence of a lunar atmosphere."

This fire mountain was situated, according to the most plausible
conjecture, somewhere in the neighborhood of the 45th degree, south
latitude, of the Moon's invisible side. For a little while the
travellers indulged the fond hope that they were directly approaching
it, but, to their great disappointment, the path described by the
Projectile lay in a different direction. Its nature therefore they had
no opportunity of ascertaining. It began to disappear behind the dark
horizon within less than half an hour after the time that M'Nicholl had
signalled it. Still, the fact of the uncontested existence of such a
phenomenon was a grand one, and of considerable importance in
selenographic investigations. It proved that heat had not altogether
disappeared from the lunar world; and the existence of heat once
settled, who can say positively that the vegetable kingdom and even the
animal kingdom have not likewise resisted so far every influence tending
to destroy them? If terrestrial astronomers could only be convinced, by
undoubted evidence, of the existence of this active volcano on the
Moon's surface, they would certainly admit of very considerable
modifications in the present doubts regarding her inhabitability.

Thoughts of this kind continued to occupy the minds of our travellers
even for some time after the little spark of light had been extinguished
in the black gloom. But they said very little; even Ardan was silent,
and continued to look out of the window. Barbican surrendered himself up
to a reverie regarding the mysterious destinies of the lunar world. Was
its present condition a foreshadowing of what our Earth is to become?
M'Nicholl, too, was lost in speculation. Was the Moon older or younger
than the Earth in the order of Creation? Had she ever been a beautiful
world of life, and color, and magnificent variety? If so, had her
inhabitants--

Great Mercy, what a cry from Ardan! It sounded human, so seldom do we
hear a shriek so expressive at once of surprise and horror and even
terror! It brought back his startled companions to their senses in a
second. Nor did they ask him for the cause of his alarm. It was only too
clear. Right in their very path, a blazing ball of fire had suddenly
risen up before their eyes, the pitchy darkness all round it rendering
its glare still more blinding. Its phosphoric coruscation filled the
Projectile with white streams of lurid light, tinging the contents with
a pallor indescribably ghastly. The travellers' faces in particular,
gleamed with that peculiar livid and cadaverous tinge, blue and yellow,
which magicians so readily produce by burning table salt in alcohol.

"_Sacré!_" cried Ardan who always spoke his own language when much
excited. "What a pair of beauties you are! Say, Barbican! What
thundering thing is coming at us now?"

"Another bolide," answered Barbican, his eye as calm as ever, though a
faint tremor was quite perceptible in his voice.

"A bolide? Burning _in vacuo_? You are joking!"

"I was never more in earnest," was the President's quiet reply, as he
looked through his closed fingers.

He knew exactly what he was saying. The dazzling glitter did not deceive
_him_. Such a meteor seen from the Earth could not appear much brighter
than the Full Moon, but here in the midst of the black ether and
unsoftened by the veil of the atmosphere, it was absolutely blinding.
These wandering bodies carry in themselves the principle of their
incandescence. Oxygen is by no means necessary for their combustion.
Some of them indeed often take fire as they rush through the layers of
our atmosphere, and generally burn out before they strike the Earth. But
others, on the contrary, and the greater number too, follow a track
through space far more distant from the Earth than the fifty miles
supposed to limit our atmosphere. In October, 1844, one of these meteors
had appeared in the sky at an altitude calculated to be at least 320
miles; and in August, 1841, another had vanished when it had reached the
height of 450 miles. A few even of those seen from the Earth must have
been several miles in diameter. The velocity with which some of them
have been calculated to move, from east to west, in a direction contrary
to that of the Earth, is astounding enough to exceed belief--about fifty
miles in a second. Our Earth does not move quite 20 miles in a second,
though it goes a thousand times quicker than the fastest locomotive.

[Illustration: THEY COULD UTTER NO WORD.]

Barbican calculated like lightning that the present object of their
alarm was only about 250 miles distant from them, and could not be
less than a mile and a quarter in diameter. It was coming on at the rate
of more than a mile a second or about 75 miles a minute. It lay right in
the path of the Projectile, and in a very few seconds indeed a terrible
collision was inevitable. The enormous rate at which it grew in size,
showed the terrible velocity at which it was approaching.

You can hardly imagine the situation of our poor travellers at the sight
of this frightful apparition. I shall certainly not attempt to describe
it. In spite of their singular courage, wonderful coolness,
extraordinary fortitude, they were now breathless, motionless, almost
helpless; their muscles were tightened to their utmost tension; their
eyes stared out of their sockets; their faces were petrified with
horror. No wonder. Their Projectile, whose course they were powerless as
children to guide, was making straight for this fiery mass, whose glare
in a few seconds had become more blinding than the open vent of a
reverberating furnace. Their own Projectile was carrying them headlong
into a bottomless abyss of fire!

Still, even in this moment of horror, their presence of mind, or at
least their consciousness, never abandoned them. Barbican had grasped
each of his friends by the hand, and all three tried as well as they
could to watch through half-closed eyelids the white-hot asteroid's
rapid approach. They could utter no word, they could breathe no prayer.
They gave themselves up for lost--in the agony of terror that partially
interrupted the ordinary functions of their brains, this was absolutely
all they could do! Hardly three minutes had elapsed since Ardan had
caught the first glimpse of it--three ages of agony! Now it was on them!
In a second--in less than a second, the terrible fireball had burst like
a shell! Thousands of glittering fragments were flying around them in
all directions--but with no more noise than is made by so many light
flakes of thistle-down floating about some warm afternoon in summer. The
blinding, blasting steely white glare of the explosion almost bereft the
travellers of the use of their eyesight forever, but no more report
reached their ears than if it had taken place at the bottom of the Gulf
of Mexico. In an atmosphere like ours, such a crash would have burst the
ear-membranes of ten thousand elephants!

In the middle of the commotion another loud cry was suddenly heard. It
was the Captain who called this time. His companions rushed to his
window and all looked out together in the same direction.

What a sight met their eyes! What pen can describe it? What pencil can
reproduce the magnificence of its coloring? It was a Vesuvius at his
best and wildest, at the moment just after the old cone has fallen in.
Millions of luminous fragments streaked the sky with their blazing
fires. All sizes and shapes of light, all colors and shades of colors,
were inextricably mingled together. Irradiations in gold, scintillations
in crimson, splendors in emerald, lucidities in ultramarine--a dazzling
girandola of every tint and of every hue. Of the enormous fireball, an
instant ago such an object of dread, nothing now remained but these
glittering pieces, shooting about in all directions, each one an
asteroid in its turn. Some flew out straight and gleaming like a steel
sword; others rushed here and there irregularly like chips struck off a
red-hot rock; and others left long trails of glittering cosmical dust
behind them like the nebulous tail of Donati's comet.

These incandescent blocks crossed each other, struck each other, crushed
each other into still smaller fragments, one of which, grazing the
Projectile, jarred it so violently that the very window at which the
travellers were standing, was cracked by the shock. Our friends felt, in
fact, as if they were the objective point at which endless volleys of
blazing shells were aimed, any of them powerful enough, if it only hit
them fair, to make as short work of the Projectile as you could of an
egg-shell. They had many hairbreadth escapes, but fortunately the
cracking of the glass proved to be the only serious damage of which they
could complain.

This extraordinary illumination lasted altogether only a few seconds;
every one of its details was of a most singular and exciting nature--but
one of its greatest wonders was yet to come. The ether, saturated with
luminous matter, developed an intensity of blazing brightness unequalled
by the lime light, the magnesium light, the electric light, or any other
dazzling source of illumination with which we are acquainted on earth.
It flashed out of these asteroids in all directions, and downwards, of
course, as well as elsewhere. At one particular instant, it was so very
vivid that Ardan, who happened to be looking downwards, cried out, as if
in transport:

"Oh!! The Moon! Visible at last!"

And the three companions, thrilling with indescribable emotion, shot a
hasty glance through the openings of the coruscating field beneath them.
Did they really catch a glimpse of the mysterious invisible disc that
the eye of man had never before lit upon? For a second or so they gazed
with enraptured fascination at all they could see. What did they see,
what could they see at a distance so uncertain that Barbican has never
been able even to guess at it? Not much. Ardan was reminded of the night
he had stood on the battlements of Dover Castle, a few years before,
when the fitful flashes of a thunder storm gave him occasional and very
uncertain glimpses of the French coast at the opposite side of the
strait. Misty strips long and narrow, extending over one portion of the
disc--probably cloud-scuds sustained by a highly rarefied
atmosphere--permitted only a very dreamy idea of lofty mountains
stretching beneath them in shapeless proportions, of smaller reliefs,
circuses, yawning craters, and the other capricious, sponge-like
formations so common on the visible side. Elsewhere the watchers became
aware for an instant of immense spaces, certainly not arid plains, but
seas, real oceans, vast and calm, reflecting from their placid depths
the dazzling fireworks of the weird and wildly flashing meteors.
Farther on, but very darkly as if behind a screen, shadowy continents
revealed themselves, their surfaces flecked with black cloudy masses,
probably great forests, with here and there a--

Nothing more! In less than a second the illumination had come to an end,
involving everything in the Moon's direction once more in pitchy
darkness.

But had the impression made on the travellers' eyes been a mere vision
or the result of a reality? an optical delusion or the shadow of a solid
fact? Could an observation so rapid, so fleeting, so superficial, be
really regarded as a genuine scientific affirmation? Could such a feeble
glimmer of the invisible disc justify them in pronouncing a decided
opinion on the inhabitability of the Moon? To such questions as these,
rising spontaneously and simultaneously in the minds of our travellers,
they could not reply at the moment; they could not reply to them long
afterwards; even to this day they can give them no satisfactory answer.
All they could do at the moment, they did. To every sight and sound they
kept their eyes and ears open, and, by observing the most perfect
silence, they sought to render their impressions too vivid to admit of
deception.

There was now, however, nothing to be heard, and very little more to be
seen. The few coruscations that flashed over the sky, gradually became
fewer and dimmer; the asteroids sought paths further and further apart,
and finally disappeared altogether. The ether resumed its original
blackness. The stars, eclipsed for a moment, blazed out again on the
firmament, and the invisible disc, that had flashed into view for an
instant, once more relapsed forever into the impenetrable depths of
night.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE.


Exceedingly narrow and exceedingly fortunate had been the escape of the
Projectile. And from a danger too the most unlikely and the most
unexpected. Who would have ever dreamed of even the possibility of such
an encounter? And was all danger over? The sight of one of these erratic
bolides certainly justified the gravest apprehensions of our travellers
regarding the existence of others. Worse than the sunken reefs of the
Southern Seas or the snags of the Mississippi, how could the Projectile
be expected to avoid them? Drifting along blindly through the boundless
ethereal ocean, _her_ inmates, even if they saw the danger, were totally
powerless to turn her aside. Like a ship without a rudder, like a
runaway horse, like a collapsed balloon, like an iceberg in an Atlantic
storm, like a boat in the Niagara rapids, she moved on sullenly,
recklessly, mechanically, mayhap into the very jaws of the most
frightful danger, the bright intelligences within no more able to modify
her motions even by a finger's breadth than they were able to affect
Mercury's movements around the Sun.

But did our friends complain of the new perils now looming up before
them? They never thought of such a thing. On the contrary, they only
considered themselves (after the lapse of a few minutes to calm their
nerves) extremely lucky in having witnessed this fresh glory of
exuberant nature, this transcendent display of fireworks which not only
cast into absolute insignificance anything of the kind they had ever
seen on Earth, but had actually enabled them by its dazzling
illumination to gaze for a second or two at the Moon's mysterious
invisible disc. This glorious momentary glance, worth a whole lifetime
of ordinary existence, had revealed to mortal ken her continents, her
oceans, her forests. But did it also convince them of the existence of
an atmosphere on her surface whose vivifying molecules would render
_life_ possible? This question they had again to leave unanswered--it
will hardly ever be answered in a way quite satisfactory to human
curiosity. Still, infinite was their satisfaction at having hovered even
for an instant on the very verge of such a great problem's solution.

It was now half-past three in the afternoon. The Projectile still
pursued its curving but otherwise unknown path over the Moon's invisible
face. Had this path been disturbed by that dangerous meteor? There was
every reason to fear so--though, disturbance or no disturbance, the
curve it described should still be one strictly in accordance with the
laws of Mechanical Philosophy. Whether it was a parabola or a hyperbola,
however, or whether it was disturbed or not, made very little difference
as, in any case, the Projectile was bound to quit pretty soon the cone
of the shadow, at a point directly opposite to where it had entered it.
This cone could not possibly be of very great extent, considering the
very slight ratio borne by the Moon's diameter when compared with the
Sun's. Still, to all appearances, the Projectile seemed to be quite as
deeply immersed in the shadow as ever, and there was apparently not the
slightest sign of such a state of things coming soon to an end. At what
rate was the Projectile now moving? Hard to say, but certainly not
slowly, certainly rapidly enough to be out of the shadow by this time,
if describing a curve rigidly parabolic. Was the curve therefore _not_
parabolic? Another puzzling problem and sadly bewildering to poor
Barbican, who had now almost lost his reason by attempting to clear up
questions that were proving altogether too profound for his overworked
brains.

Not that he ever thought of taking rest. Not that his companions thought
of taking rest. Far from it. With senses as high-strung as ever, they
still watched carefully for every new fact, every unexpected incident
that might throw some light on the sidereal investigations. Even their
dinner, or what was called so, consisted of only a few bits of bread and
meat, distributed by Ardan at five o'clock, and swallowed mechanically.
They did not even turn on the gas full head to see what they were
eating; each man stood solidly at his window, the glass of which they
had enough to do in keeping free from the rapidly condensing moisture.

At about half-past five, however, M'Nicholl, who had been gazing for
some time with his telescope in a particular direction, called the
attention of his companions to some bright specks of light barely
discernible in that part of the horizon towards which the Projectile was
evidently moving. His words were hardly uttered when his companions
announced the same discovery. They could soon all see the glittering
specks not only becoming more and more numerous, but also gradually
assuming the shape of an extremely slender, but extremely brilliant
crescent. Rapidly more brilliant and more decided in shape the profile
gradually grew, till it soon resembled the first faint sketch of the New
Moon that we catch of evenings in the western sky, or rather the first
glimpse we get of her limb as it slowly moves out of eclipse. But it was
inconceivably brighter than either, and was furthermore strangely
relieved by the pitchy blackness both of sky and Moon. In fact, it soon
became so brilliant as to dispel in a moment all doubt as to its
particular nature. No meteor could present such a perfect shape; no
volcano, such dazzling splendor.

"The Sun!" cried Barbican.

"The Sun?" asked M'Nicholl and Ardan in some astonishment.

"Yes, dear friends; it is the Sun himself that you now see; these
summits that you behold him gilding are the mountains that lie on the
Moon's southern rim. We are rapidly nearing her south pole."

"After doubling her north pole!" cried Ardan; "why, we must be
circumnavigating her!"

"Exactly; sailing all around her."

"Hurrah! Then we're all right at last! There's nothing more to fear from
your hyperbolas or parabolas or any other of your open curves!"

"Nothing more, certainly, from an open curve, but every thing from a
closed one."

"A closed curve! What is it called? And what is the trouble?"

"An eclipse it is called; and the trouble is that, instead of flying off
into the boundless regions of space, our Projectile will probably
describe an elliptical orbit around the Moon--"

--"What!" cried M'Nicholl, in amazement, "and be her satellite for
ever!"

"All right and proper," said Ardan; "why shouldn't she have one of her
own?"

"Only, my dear friend," said Barbican to Ardan, "this change of curve
involves no change in the doom of the Projectile. We are as infallibly
lost by an ellipse as by a parabola."

"Well, there was one thing I never could reconcile myself to in the
whole arrangement," replied Ardan cheerfully; "and that was destruction
by an open curve. Safe from that, I could say, 'Fate, do your worst!'
Besides, I don't believe in the infallibility of your ellipsic. It may
prove just as unreliable as the hyperbola. And it is no harm to hope
that it may!"

From present appearances there was very little to justify Ardan's hope.
Barbican's theory of the elliptic orbit was unfortunately too well
grounded to allow a single reasonable doubt to be expressed regarding
the Projectile's fate. It was to gravitate for ever around the Moon--a
sub-satellite. It was a new born individual in the astral universe, a
microcosm, a little world in itself, containing, however, only three
inhabitants and even these destined to perish pretty soon for want of
air. Our travellers, therefore, had no particular reason for rejoicing
over the new destiny reserved for the Projectile in obedience to the
inexorable laws of the centripetal and centrifugal forces. They were
soon, it is true, to have the opportunity of beholding once more the
illuminated face of the Moon. They might even live long enough to catch
a last glimpse of the distant Earth bathed in the glory of the solar
rays. They might even have strength enough left to be able to chant one
solemn final eternal adieu to their dear old Mother World, upon whose
features their mortal eyes should never again rest in love and longing!
Then, what was their Projectile to become? An inert, lifeless, extinct
mass, not a particle better than the most defunct asteroid that wanders
blindly through the fields of ether. A gloomy fate to look forward to.
Yet, instead of grieving over the inevitable, our bold travellers
actually felt thrilled with delight at the prospect of even a momentary
deliverance from those gloomy depths of darkness and of once more
finding themselves, even if only for a few hours, in the cheerful
precincts illuminated by the genial light of the blessed Sun!

The ring of light, in the meantime, becoming brighter and brighter,
Barbican was not long in discovering and pointing out to his companions
the different mountains that lay around the Moon's south pole.

"There is _Leibnitz_ on your right," said he, "and on your left you can
easily see the peaks of _Doerfel_. Belonging rather to the Moon's dark
side than to her Earth side, they are visible to terrestrial astronomers
only when she is in her highest northern latitudes. Those faint peaks
beyond them that you can catch with such difficulty must be those of
_Newton_ and _Curtius_."

"How in the world can you tell?" asked Ardan.

"They are the highest mountains in the circumpolar regions," replied
Barbican. "They have been measured with the greatest care; _Newton_ is
23,000 feet high."

"More or less!" laughed Ardan. "What Delphic oracle says so?"

"Dear friend," replied Barbican quietly, "the visible mountains of the
Moon have been measured so carefully and so accurately that I should
hardly hesitate in affirming their altitude to be as well known as that
of Mont Blanc, or, at least, as those of the chief peaks in the
Himalayahs or the Rocky Mountain Range."

"I should like to know how people set about it," observed Ardan
incredulously.

"There are several well known methods of approaching this problem,"
replied Barbican; "and as these methods, though founded on different
principles, bring us constantly to the same result, we may pretty
safely conclude that our calculations are right. We have no time, just
now to draw diagrams, but, if I express myself clearly, you will no
doubt easily catch the general principle."

"Go ahead!" answered Ardan. "Anything but Algebra."

"We want no Algebra now," said Barbican, "It can't enable us to find
principles, though it certainly enables us to apply them. Well. The Sun
at a certain altitude shines on one side of a mountain and flings a
shadow on the other. The length of this shadow is easily found by means
of a telescope, whose object glass is provided with a micrometer. This
consists simply of two parallel spider threads, one of which is
stationary and the other movable. The Moon's real diameter being known
and occupying a certain space on the object glass, the exact space
occupied by the shadow can be easily ascertained by means of the movable
thread. This space, compared with the Moon's space, will give us the
length of the shadow. Now, as under the same circumstances a certain
height can cast only a certain shadow, of course a knowledge of the one
must give you that of the other, and _vice versa_. This method, stated
roughly, was that followed by Galileo, and, in our own day, by Beer and
Maedler, with extraordinary success."

"I certainly see some sense in this method," said Ardan, "if they took
extraordinary pains to observe correctly. The least carelessness would
set them wrong, not only by feet but by miles. We have time enough,
however, to listen to another method before we get into the full blaze
of the glorious old Sol."

"The other method," interrupted M'Nicholl laying down his telescope to
rest his eyes, and now joining in the conversation to give himself
something to do, "is called that of the _tangent rays_. A solar ray,
barely passing the edge of the Moon's surface, is caught on the peak of
a mountain the rest of which lies in shadow. The distance between this
starry peak and the line separating the light from the darkness, we
measure carefully by means of our telescope. Then--"

"I see it at a glance!" interrupted Ardan with lighting eye; "the ray,
being a tangent, of course makes right angles with the radius, which is
known: consequently we have two sides and one angle--quite enough to
find the other parts of the triangle. Very ingenious--but now, that I
think of it--is not this method absolutely impracticable for every
mountain except those in the immediate neighborhood of the light and
shadow line?"

"That's a defect easily remedied by patience," explained Barbican--the
Captain, who did not like being interrupted, having withdrawn to his
telescope--"As this line is continually changing, in course of time all
the mountains must come near it. A third method--to measure the mountain
profile directly by means of the micrometer--is evidently applicable
only to altitudes lying exactly on the lunar rim."

"That is clear enough," said Ardan, "and another point is also very
clear. In Full Moon no measurement is possible. When no shadows are
made, none can be measured. Measurements, right or wrong, are possible
only when the solar rays strike the Moon's surface obliquely with regard
to the observer. Am I right, Signor Barbicani, maestro illustrissimo?"

"Perfectly right," replied Barbican. "You are an apt pupil."

"Say that again," said Ardan. "I want Mac to hear it."

Barbican humored him by repeating the observation, but M'Nicholl would
only notice it by a grunt of doubtful meaning.

"Was Galileo tolerably successful in his calculations?" asked Ardan,
resuming the conversation.

Before answering this question, Barbican unrolled the map of the Moon,
which a faint light like that of day-break now enabled him to examine.
He then went on: "Galileo was wonderfully successful--considering that
the telescope which he employed was a poor instrument of his own
construction, magnifying only thirty times. He gave the lunar mountains
a height of about 26,000 feet--an altitude cut down by Hevelius, but
almost doubled by Riccioli. Herschel was the first to come pretty close
to the truth, but Beer and Maedler, whose _Mappa Selenographica_ now
lies before us, have left really nothing more to be done for lunar
astronomy--except, of course, to pay a personal visit to the
Moon--which we have tried to do, but I fear with a very poor prospect of
success."

"Cheer up! cheer up!" cried Ardan. "It's not all over yet by long odds.
Who can say what is still in store for us? Another bolide may shunt us
off our ellipse and even send us to the Moon's surface."

Then seeing Barbican shake his head ominously and his countenance become
more and more depressed, this true friend tried to brighten him up a bit
by feigning to take deep interest in a subject that to him was
absolutely the driest in the world.

"Meer and Baedler--I mean Beer and Maedler," he went on, "must have
measured at least forty or fifty mountains to their satisfaction."

"Forty or fifty!" exclaimed Barbican. "They measured no fewer than a
thousand and ninety-five lunar mountains and crater summits with a
perfect success. Six of these reach an altitude of upwards of 18,000
feet, and twenty-two are more than 15,000 feet high."

"Which is the highest in the lot?" asked Ardan, keenly relishing
Barbican's earnestness.

"_Doerfel_ in the southern hemisphere, the peak of which I have just
pointed out, is the highest of the lunar mountains so far measured,"
replied Barbican. "It is nearly 25,000 feet high."

"Indeed! Five thousand feet lower than Mount Everest--still for a lunar
mountain, it is quite a respectable altitude."

"Respectable! Why it's an enormous altitude, my dear friend, if you
compare it with the Moon's diameter. The Earth's diameter being more
than 3-1/2 times greater than the Moon's, if the Earth's mountains bore
the same ratio to those of the Moon, Everest should be more than sixteen
miles high, whereas it is not quite six."

"How do the general heights of the Himalayahs compare with those of the
highest lunar mountains?" asked Ardan, wondering what would be his next
question.

"Fifteen peaks in the eastern or higher division of the Himalayahs, are
higher than the loftiest lunar peaks," replied Barbican. "Even in the
western, or lower section of the Himalayahs, some of the peaks exceed
_Doerfel_."

"Which are the chief lunar mountains that exceed Mont Blanc in
altitude?" asked Ardan, bravely suppressing a yawn.

"The following dozen, ranged, if my memory does not fail me, in the
exact order of their respective heights;" replied Barbican, never
wearied in answering such questions: "_Newton_, _Curtius_, _Casatus_,
_Rheita_, _Short_, _Huyghens_, _Biancanus_, _Tycho_, _Kircher_,
_Clavius_, _Endymion_, and _Catharina_."

"Now those not quite up to Mont Blanc?" asked Ardan, hardly knowing what
to say.

"Here they are, about half a dozen of them: _Moretus_, _Theophilus_,
_Harpalus_, _Eratosthenes_, _Werner_, and _Piccolomini_," answered
Barbican as ready as a schoolboy reciting his lesson, and pointing them
out on the map as quickly as a compositor distributing his type.

"The next in rank?" asked Ardan, astounded at his friend's wonderful
memory.

"The next in rank," replied Barbican promptly, "are those about the size
of the Matterhorn, that is to say about 2-3/4 miles in height. They are
_Macrobius_, _Delambre_, and _Conon_. Come," he added, seeing Ardan
hesitating and at a loss what other question to ask, "don't you want to
know what lunar mountains are about the same height as the Peak of
Teneriffe? or as Ætna? or as Mount Washington? You need not be afraid of
puzzling me. I studied up the subject thoroughly, and therefore know all
about it."

"Oh! I could listen to you with delight all day long!" cried Ardan,
enthusiastically, though with some embarrassment, for he felt a twinge
of conscience in acting so falsely towards his beloved friend. "The fact
is," he went on, "such a rational conversation as the present, on such
an absorbing subject, with such a perfect master--"

"The Sun!" cried M'Nicholl starting up and cheering. "He's cleared the
disc completely, and he's now himself again! Long life to him! Hurrah!"

"Hurrah!" cried the others quite as enthusiastically (Ardan did not seem
a bit desirous to finish his sentence).

They tossed their maps aside and hastened to the window.




CHAPTER XVII.

TYCHO.


It was now exactly six o'clock in the evening. The Sun, completely clear
of all contact with the lunar disc, steeped the whole Projectile in his
golden rays. The travellers, vertically over the Moon's south pole,
were, as Barbican soon ascertained, about 30 miles distant from it, the
exact distance they had been from the north pole--a proof that the
elliptic curve still maintained itself with mathematical rigor.

For some time, the travellers' whole attention was concentrated on the
glorious Sun. His light was inexpressibly cheering; and his heat, soon
penetrating the walls of the Projectile, infused a new and sweet life
into their chilled and exhausted frames. The ice rapidly disappeared,
and the windows soon resumed their former perfect transparency.

"Oh! how good the pleasant sunlight is!" cried the Captain, sinking on a
seat in a quiet ecstasy of enjoyment. "How I pity Ardan's poor friends
the Selenites during that night so long and so icy! How impatient they
must be to see the Sun back again!"

"Yes," said Ardan, also sitting down the better to bask in the vivifying
rays, "his light no doubt brings them to life and keeps them alive.
Without light or heat during all that dreary winter, they must freeze
stiff like the frogs or become torpid like the bears. I can't imagine
how they could get through it otherwise."

"I'm glad _we're_ through it anyhow," observed M'Nicholl. "I may at once
acknowledge that I felt perfectly miserable as long as it lasted. I can
now easily understand how the combined cold and darkness killed Doctor
Kane's Esquimaux dogs. It was near killing me. I was so miserable that
at last I could neither talk myself nor bear to hear others talk."

"My own case exactly," said Barbican--"that is," he added hastily,
correcting himself, "I tried to talk because I found Ardan so
interested, but in spite of all we said, and saw, and had to think of,
Byron's terrible dream would continually rise up before me:

    "The bright Sun was extinguished, and the Stars
    Wandered all darkling in the eternal space,
    Rayless and pathless, and the icy Earth
    Swung blind and blackening in the Moonless air.
    Morn came and went, and came and brought no day!
    And men forgot their passions in the dread
    Of this their desolation, and all hearts
    Were chilled into a selfish prayer for _light_!"

As he pronounced these words in accents at once monotonous and
melancholy, Ardan, fully appreciative, quietly gesticulated in perfect
cadence with the rhythm. Then the three men remained completely silent
for several minutes. Buried in recollection, or lost in thought, or
magnetized by the bright Sun, they seemed to be half asleep while
steeping their limbs in his vitalizing beams.

Barbican was the first to dissolve the reverie by jumping up. His sharp
eye had noticed that the base of the Projectile, instead of keeping
rigidly perpendicular to the lunar surface, turned away a little, so as
to render the elliptical orbit somewhat elongated. This he made his
companions immediately observe, and also called their attention to the
fact that from this point they could easily have seen the Earth had it
been Full, but that now, drowned in the Sun's beams, it was quite
invisible. A more attractive spectacle, however, soon engaged their
undivided attention--that of the Moon's southern regions, now brought
within about the third of a mile by their telescopes. Immediately
resuming their posts by the windows, they carefully noted every feature
presented by the fantastic panorama that stretched itself out in endless
lengths beneath their wondering eyes.

[Illustration: THEY SEEMED HALF ASLEEP.]

Mount _Leibnitz_ and Mount _Doerfel_ form two separate groups developed
in the regions of the extreme south. The first extends westwardly from
the pole to the 84th parallel; the second, on the southeastern border,
starting from the pole, reaches the neighborhood of the 65th. In the
entangled valleys of their clustered peaks, appeared the dazzling sheets
of white, noted by Father Secchi, but their peculiar nature Barbican
could now examine with a greater prospect of certainty than the
illustrious Roman astronomer had ever enjoyed.

"They're beds of snow," he said at last in a decided tone.

"Snow!" exclaimed M'Nicholl.

"Yes, snow, or rather glaciers heavily coated with glittering ice. See
how vividly they reflect the Sun's rays. Consolidated beds of lava could
never shine with such dazzling uniformity. Therefore there must be both
water and air on the Moon's surface. Not much--perhaps very little if
you insist on it--but the fact that there is some can now no longer be
questioned."

This assertion of Barbican's, made so positively by a man who never
decided unless when thoroughly convinced, was a great triumph for Ardan,
who, as the gracious reader doubtless remembers, had had a famous
dispute with M'Nicholl on that very subject at Tampa.[D] His eyes
brightened and a smile of pleasure played around his lips, but, with a
great effort at self-restraint, he kept perfectly silent and would not
permit himself even to look in the direction of the Captain. As for
M'Nicholl, he was apparently too much absorbed in _Doerfel_ and
_Leibnitz_ to mind anything else.

These mountains rose from plains of moderate extent, bounded by an
indefinite succession of walled hollows and ring ramparts. They are the
only chains met in this region of ridge-brimmed craters and circles;
distinguished by no particular feature, they project a few pointed peaks
here and there, some of which exceed four miles and a half in height.
This altitude, however, foreshortened as it was by the vertical position
of the Projectile, could not be noticed just then, even if correct
observation had been permitted by the dazzling surface.

Once more again before the travellers' eyes the Moon's disc revealed
itself in all the old familiar features so characteristic of lunar
landscapes--no blending of tones, no softening of colors, no graduation
of shadows, every line glaring in white or black by reason of the total
absence of refracted light. And yet the wonderfully peculiar character
of this desolate world imparted to it a weird attraction as strangely
fascinating as ever.

Over this chaotic region the travellers were now sweeping, as if borne
on the wings of a storm; the peaks defiled beneath them; the yawning
chasms revealed their ruin-strewn floors; the fissured cracks untwisted
themselves; the ramparts showed all their sides; the mysterious holes
presented their impenetrable depths; the clustered mountain summits and
rings rapidly decomposed themselves: but in a moment again all had
become more inextricably entangled than ever. Everything appeared to be
the finished handiwork of volcanic agency, in the utmost purity and
highest perfection. None of the mollifying effects of air or water could
here be noticed. No smooth-capped mountains, no gently winding river
channels, no vast prairie-lands of deposited sediment, no traces of
vegetation, no signs of agriculture, no vestiges of a great city.
Nothing but vast beds of glistering lava, now rough like immense piles
of scoriae and clinker, now smooth like crystal mirrors, and reflecting
the Sun's rays with the same intolerable glare. Not the faintest speck
of life. A world absolutely and completely dead, fixed, still,
motionless--save when a gigantic land-slide, breaking off the vertical
wall of a crater, plunged down into the soundless depths, with all the
fury too of a crashing avalanche, with all the speed of a Niagara, but,
in the total absence of atmosphere, noiseless as a feather, as a snow
flake, as a grain of impalpable dust.

Careful observations, taken by Barbican and repeated by his companions,
soon satisfied them that the ridgy outline of the mountains on the
Moon's border, though perhaps due to different forces from those acting
in the centre, still presented a character generally uniform. The same
bulwark-surrounded hollows, the same abrupt projections of surface. Yet
a different arrangement, as Barbican pointed out to his companions,
might be naturally expected. In the central portion of the disc, the
Moon's crust, before solidification, must have been subjected to two
attractions--that of the Moon herself and that of the Earth--acting,
however, in contrary directions and therefore, in a certain sense,
serving to neutralize each other. Towards the border of her disc, on the
contrary, the terrestrial attraction, having acted in a direction
perpendicular to that of the lunar, should have exerted greater power,
and therefore given a different shape to the general contour. But no
remarkable difference had so far been perceived by terrestrial
observers; and none could now be detected by our travellers. Therefore
the Moon must have found in herself alone the principle of her shape and
of her superficial development--that is, she owed nothing to external
influences. "Arago was perfectly right, therefore," concluded Barbican,
"in the remarkable opinion to which he gave expression thirty years ago:

'No external action whatever has contributed to the formation of the
Moon's diversified surface.'"

"But don't you think, Barbican," asked the Captain, "that every force,
internal or external, that might modify the Moon's shape, has ceased
long ago?"

"I am rather inclined to that opinion," said Barbican; "it is not,
however, a new one. Descartes maintained that as the Earth is an extinct
Sun, so is the Moon an extinct Earth. My own opinion at present is that
the Moon is now the image of death, but I can't say if she has ever been
the abode of life."

"The abode of life!" cried Ardan, who had great repugnance in accepting
the idea that the Moon was no better than a heap of cinders and ashes;
"why, look there! If those are not as neat a set of the ruins of an
abandoned city as ever I saw, I should like to know what they are!"

[Illustration: ONCE MORE THE PIPES OF AN AQUEDUCT.]

He pointed to some very remarkable rocky formations in the
neighborhood of _Short_, a ring mountain rising to an altitude
considerably higher than that of Mont Blanc. Even Barbican and M'Nicholl
could detect some regularity and semblance of order in the arrangement
of these rocks, but this, of course, they looked on as a mere freak of
nature, like the Lurlei Rock, the Giant's Causeway, or the Old Man of
the Franconia Mountains. Ardan, however, would not accept such an easy
mode of getting rid of a difficulty.

"See the ruins on that bluff," he exclaimed; "those steep sides must
have been washed by a great river in the prehistoric times. That was the
fortress. Farther down lay the city. There are the dismantled ramparts;
why, there's the very coping of a portico still intact! Don't you see
three broken pillars lying beside their pedestals? There! a little to
the left of those arches that evidently once bore the pipes of an
aqueduct! You don't see them? Well, look a little to the right, and
there is something that you can see! As I'm a living man I have no
difficulty in discerning the gigantic butments of a great bridge that
formerly spanned that immense river!"

Did he really see all this? To this day he affirms stoutly that he did,
and even greater wonders besides. His companions, however, without
denying that he had good grounds for his assertion on this subject or
questioning the general accuracy of his observations, content themselves
with saying that the reason why they had failed to discover the
wonderful city, was that Ardan's telescope was of a strange and
peculiar construction. Being somewhat short-sighted, he had had it
manufactured expressly for his own use, but it was of such singular
power that his companions could not use it without hurting their eyes.

But, whether the ruins were real or not, the moments were evidently too
precious to be lost in idle discussion. The great city of the Selenites
soon disappeared on the remote horizon, and, what was of far greater
importance, the distance of the Projectile from the Moon's disc began to
increase so sensibly that the smaller details of the surface were soon
lost in a confused mass, and it was only the lofty heights, the wide
craters, the great ring mountains, and the vast plains that still
continued to give sharp, distinctive outlines.

A little to their left, the travellers could now plainly distinguish one
of the most remarkable of the Moon's craters, _Newton_, so well known to
all lunar astronomers. Its ramparts, forming a perfect circle, rise to
such a height, at least 22,000 feet, as to seem insurmountable.

"You can, no doubt, notice for yourselves," said Barbican, "that the
external height of this mountain is far from being equal to the depth of
its crater. The enormous pit, in fact, seems to be a soundless sea of
pitchy black, the bottom of which the Sun's rays have never reached.
There, as Humboldt says, reigns eternal darkness, so absolute that
Earth-shine or even Sunlight is never able to dispel it. Had Michael's
friends the old mythologists ever known anything about it, they would
doubtless have made it the entrance to the infernal regions. On the
whole surface of our Earth, there is no mountain even remotely
resembling it. It is a perfect type of the lunar crater. Like most of
them, it shows that the peculiar formation of the Moon's surface is due,
first, to the cooling of the lunar crust; secondly, to the cracking from
internal pressure; and, thirdly, to the violent volcanic action in
consequence. This must have been of a far fiercer nature than it has
ever been with us. The matter was ejected to a vast height till great
mountains were formed; and still the action went on, until at last the
floor of the crater sank to a depth far lower than the level of the
external plain."

"You may be right," said Ardan by way of reply; "as for me, I'm looking
out for another city. But I'm sorry to say that our Projectile is
increasing its distance so fast that, even if one lay at my feet at this
moment, I doubt very much if I could see it a bit better than either you
or the Captain."

_Newton_ was soon passed, and the Projectile followed a course that took
it directly over the ring mountain _Moretus_. A little to the west the
travellers could easily distinguish the summits of _Blancanus_, 7,000
feet high, and, towards seven o'clock in the evening, they were
approaching the neighborhood of _Clavius_.

This walled-plain, one of the most remarkable on the Moon, lies 55° S.
by 15° E. Its height is estimated at 16,000 feet, but it is considered
to be about a hundred and fifty miles in diameter. Of this vast crater,
the travellers now at a distance of 250 miles, reduced to 2-1/2 by their
telescopes, had a magnificent bird's-eye view.

"Our terrestrial volcanoes," said Barbican, "as you can now readily
judge for yourselves, are no more than molehills when compared with
those of the Moon. Measure the old craters formed by the early eruptions
of Vesuvius and Ætna, and you will find them little more than three
miles in diameter. The crater of Cantal in central France is only about
six miles in width; the famous valley in Ceylon, called the _Crater_,
though not at all due to volcanic action, is 44 miles across and is
considered to be the greatest in the world. But even this is very little
in comparison to the diameter of _Clavius_ lying beneath us at the
present moment."

"How much is its diameter?" asked the Captain.

"At least one hundred and forty-two miles," replied Barbican; "it is
probably the greatest in the Moon, but many others measure more than a
hundred miles across."

"Dear boys," said Ardan, half to himself, half to the others, "only
imagine the delicious state of things on the surface of the gentle Moon
when these craters, brimming over with hissing lava, were vomiting
forth, all at the same time, showers of melted stones, clouds of
blinding smoke, and sheets of blasting flame! What an intensely
overpowering spectacle was here presented once, but now, how are the
mighty fallen! Our Moon, as at present beheld, seems to be nothing more
than the skinny spectre left after a brilliant display of fireworks,
when the spluttering crackers, the glittering wheels, the hissing
serpents, the revolving suns, and the dazzling stars, are all 'played
out', and nothing remains to tell of the gorgeous spectacle but a few
blackened sticks and half a dozen half burned bits of pasteboard. I
should like to hear one of you trying to explain the cause, the reason,
the principle, the philosophy of such tremendous cataclysms!"

Barbican's only reply was a series of nods, for in truth he had not
heard a single word of Ardan's philosophic explosion. His ears were with
his eyes, and these were obstinately bent on the gigantic ramparts of
_Clavius_, formed of concentric mountain ridges, which were actually
leagues in depth. On the floor of the vast cavity, could be seen
hundreds of smaller craters, mottling it like a skimming dish, and
pierced here and there by sharp peaks, one of which could hardly be less
than 15,000 feet high.

All around, the plain was desolate in the extreme. You could not
conceive how anything could be barrener than these serrated outlines, or
gloomier than these shattered mountains--until you looked at the plain
that encircled them. Ardan hardly exaggerated when he called it the
scene of a battle fought thousands of years ago but still white with the
hideous bones of overthrown peaks, slaughtered mountains and mutilated
precipices!

    "Hills amid the air encountered hills,
    Hurled to and fro in jaculation dire,"

murmured M'Nicholl, who could quote you Milton quite as readily as the
Bible.

"This must have been the spot," muttered Barbican to himself, "where the
brittle shell of the cooling sphere, being thicker than usual, offered
greater resistance to an eruption of the red-hot nucleus. Hence these
piled up buttresses, and these orderless heaps of consolidated lava and
ejected scoriæ."

The Projectile advanced, but the scene of desolation seemed to remain
unchanged. Craters, ring mountains, pitted plateaus dotted with
shapeless wrecks, succeeded each other without interruption. For level
plain, for dark "sea," for smooth plateau, the eye here sought in vain.
It was a Swiss Greenland, an Icelandic Norway, a Sahara of shattered
crust studded with countless hills of glassy lava.

At last, in the very centre of this blistered region, right too at its
very culmination, the travellers came on the brightest and most
remarkable mountain of the Moon. In the dazzling _Tycho_ they found it
an easy matter to recognize the famous lunar point, which the world will
for ever designate by the name of the distinguished astronomer of
Denmark.

This brilliant luminosity of the southern hemisphere, no one that ever
gazes at the Full Moon in a cloudless sky, can help noticing. Ardan, who
had always particularly admired it, now hailed it as an old friend, and
almost exhausted breath, imagination and vocabulary in the epithets with
which he greeted this cynosure of the lunar mountains.

"Hail!" he cried, "thou blazing focus of glittering streaks, thou
coruscating nucleus of irradiation, thou starting point of rays
divergent, thou egress of meteoric flashes! Hub of the silver wheel that
ever rolls in silent majesty over the starry plains of Night! Paragon of
jewels enchased in a carcanet of dazzling brilliants! Eye of the
universe, beaming with heavenly resplendescence!

"Who shall say what thou art? Diana's nimbus? The golden clasp of her
floating robes? The blazing head of the great bolt that rivets the lunar
hemispheres in union inseverable? Or cans't thou have been some errant
bolide, which missing its way, butted blindly against the lunar face,
and there stuck fast, like a Minie ball mashed against a cast-iron
target? Alas! nobody knows. Not even Barbican is able to penetrate thy
mystery. But one thing _I_ know. Thy dazzling glare so sore my eyes hath
made that longer on thy light to gaze I do not dare. Captain, have you
any smoked glass?"

In spite of this anti-climax, Ardan's companions could hardly consider
his utterings either as ridiculous or over enthusiastic. They could
easily excuse his excitement on the subject. And so could we, if we only
remember that _Tycho_, though nearly a quarter of a million miles
distant, is such a luminous point on the lunar disc, that almost any
moonlit night it can be easily perceived by the unaided terrestrial eye.
What then must have been its splendor in the eyes of our travellers
whose telescopes brought it actually four thousand times nearer! No
wonder that with smoked glasses, they endeavored to soften off its
effulgent glare! Then in hushed silence, or at most uttering at
intervals a few interjections expressive of their intense admiration,
they remained for some time completely engrossed in the overwhelming
spectacle. For the time being, every sentiment, impression, thought,
feeling on their part, was concentrated in the eye, just as at other
times under violent excitement every throb of our life is concentrated
in the heart.

_Tycho_ belongs to the system of lunar craters that is called
_radiating_, like _Aristarchus_ or _Copernicus_, which had been already
seen and highly admired by our travellers at their first approach to the
Moon. But it is decidedly the most remarkable and conspicuous of them
all. It occupies the great focus of disruption, whence it sends out
great streaks thousands of miles in length; and it gives the most
unmistakable evidence of the terribly eruptive nature of those forces
that once shattered the Moon's solidified shell in this portion of the
lunar surface.

Situated in the southern latitude of 43° by an eastern longitude of 12°,
_Tycho's_ crater, somewhat elliptical in shape, is 54 miles in diameter
and upwards of 16,000 feet in depth. Its lofty ramparts are buttressed
by other mountains, Mont Blancs in size, all grouped around it, and all
streaked with the great divergent fissures that radiate from it as a
centre.

Of what this incomparable mountain really is, with all these lines of
projections converging towards it and with all these prominent points
of relief protruding within its crater, photography has, so far, been
able to give us only a very unsatisfactory idea. The reason too is very
simple: it is only at Full Moon that _Tycho_ reveals himself in all his
splendor. The shadows therefore vanishing, the perspective
foreshortenings disappear and the views become little better than a dead
blank. This is the more to be regretted as this wonderful region is well
worthy of being represented with the greatest possible photographic
accuracy. It is a vast agglomeration of holes, craters, ring formations,
a complicated intersection of crests--in short, a distracting volcanic
network flung over the blistered soil. The ebullitions of the central
eruption still evidently preserve their original form. As they first
appeared, so they lie. Crystallizing as they cooled, they have
stereotyped in imperishable characters the aspect formerly presented by
the whole Moon's surface under the influences of recent plutonic
upheaval.

Our travellers were far more fortunate than the photographers. The
distance separating them from the peaks of _Tycho's_ concentric terraces
was not so considerable as to conceal the principal details from a very
satisfactory view. They could easily distinguish the annular ramparts of
the external circumvallation, the mountains buttressing the gigantic
walls internally as well as externally, the vast esplanades descending
irregularly and abruptly to the sunken plains all around. They could
even detect a difference of a few hundred feet in altitude in favor of
the western or right hand side over the eastern. They could also see
that these dividing ridges were actually inaccessible and completely
unsurmountable, at least by ordinary terrestrian efforts. No system of
castrametation ever devised by Polybius or Vauban could bear the
slightest comparison with such vast fortifications, A city built on the
floor of the circular cavity could be no more reached by the outside
Lunarians than if it had been built in the planet Mars.

This idea set Ardan off again. "Yes," said he, "such a city would be at
once completely inaccessible, and still not inconveniently situated in a
plateau full of aspects decidedly picturesque. Even in the depths of
this immense crater, Nature, as you can see, has left no flat and empty
void. You can easily trace its special oreography, its various mountain
systems which turn it into a regular world on a small scale. Notice its
cones, its central hills, its valleys, its substructures already cut and
dry and therefore quietly prepared to receive the masterpieces of
Selenite architecture. Down there to the left is a lovely spot for a
Saint Peter's; to the right, a magnificent site for a Forum; here a
Louvre could be built capable of entrancing Michael Angelo himself;
there a citadel could be raised to which even Gibraltar would be a
molehill! In the middle rises a sharp peak which can hardly be less than
a mile in height--a grand pedestal for the statue of some Selenite
Vincent de Paul or George Washington. And around them all is a mighty
mountain-ring at least 3 miles high, but which, to an eye looking from
the centre of our vast city, could not appear to be more than five or
six hundred feet. Enormous circus, where mighty Rome herself in her
palmiest days, though increased tenfold, would have no reason to
complain for want of room!"

He stopped for a few seconds, perhaps to take breath, and then resumed:

"Oh what an abode of serene happiness could be constructed within this
shadow-fringed ring of the mighty mountains! O blessed refuge,
unassailable by aught of human ills! What a calm unruffled life could be
enjoyed within thy hallowed precincts, even by those cynics, those
haters of humanity, those disgusted reconstructors of society, those
misanthropes and misogynists old and young, who are continually writing
whining verses in odd corners of the newspapers!"

"Right at last, Ardan, my boy!" cried M'Nicholl, quietly rubbing the
glass of his spectacles; "I should like to see the whole lot of them
carted in there without a moment's delay!"

"It couldn't hold the half of them!" observed Barbican drily.

[Footnote D: BALTIMORE GUN CLUB, pp. 295 _et seq._]




CHAPTER XVIII.

PUZZLING QUESTIONS.


It was not until the Projectile had passed a little beyond _Tycho's_
immense concavity that Barbican and his friends had a good opportunity
for observing the brilliant streaks sent so wonderfully flying in all
directions from this celebrated mountain as a common centre. They
examined them for some time with the closest attention.

What could be the nature of this radiating aureola? By what geological
phenomena could this blazing coma have been possibly produced? Such
questions were the most natural things in the world for Barbican and his
companions to propound to themselves, as indeed they have been to every
astronomer from the beginning of time, and probably will be to the end.

What _did_ they see? What you can see, what anybody can see on a clear
night when the Moon is full--only our friends had all the advantages of
a closer view. From _Tycho_, as a focus, radiated in all directions, as
from the head of a peeled orange, more than a hundred luminous streaks
or channels, edges raised, middle depressed--or perhaps _vice versa_,
owing to an optical illusion--some at least twelve miles wide, some
fully thirty. In certain directions they ran for a distance of at least
six hundred miles, and seemed--especially towards the west, northwest,
and north--to cover half the southern hemisphere. One of these flashes
extended as far as _Neander_ on the 40th meridian; another, curving
around so as to furrow the _Mare Nectaris_, came to an end on the chain
of the _Pyrenees_, after a course of perhaps a little more than seven
hundred miles. On the east, some of them barred with luminous network
the _Mare Nubium_ and even the _Mare Humorum_.

The most puzzling feature of these glittering streaks was that they ran
their course directly onward, apparently neither obstructed by valley,
crater, or mountain ridge however high. They all started, as said
before, from one common focus, _Tycho's_ crater. From this they
certainly all seemed to emanate. Could they be rivers of lava once
vomited from that centre by resistless volcanic agency and afterwards
crystallized into glassy rock? This idea of Herschel's, Barbican had no
hesitation in qualifying as exceedingly absurd. Rivers running in
perfectly straight lines, across plains, and _up_ as well as _down_
mountains!

"Other astronomers," he continued, "have looked on these streaks as a
peculiar kind of _moraines_, that is, long lines of erratic blocks
belched forth with mighty power at the period of _Tycho's_ own
upheaval."

"How do you like that theory, Barbican," asked the Captain.

"It's not a particle better than Herschel's," was the reply; "no
volcanic action could project rocks to a distance of six or seven
hundred miles, not to talk of laying them down so regularly that we
can't detect a break in them."

"Happy thought!" cried Ardan suddenly; "it seems to me that I can tell
the cause of these radiating streaks!"

"Let us hear it," said Barbican.

"Certainly," was Ardan's reply; "these streaks are all only the parts of
what we call a 'star,' as made by a stone striking ice; or by a ball, a
pane of glass."

"Not bad," smiled Barbican approvingly; "only where is the hand that
flung the stone or threw the ball?"

"The hand is hardly necessary," replied Ardan, by no means disconcerted;
"but as for the ball, what do you say to a comet?"

Here M'Nicholl laughed so loud that Ardan was seriously irritated.
However, before he could say anything cutting enough to make the Captain
mind his manners, Barbican had quickly resumed:

"Dear friend, let the comets alone, I beg of you; the old astronomers
fled to them on all occasions and made them explain every difficulty--"

--"The comets were all used up long ago--" interrupted M'Nicholl.

--"Yes," went on Barbican, as serenely as a judge, "comets, they said,
had fallen on the surface in meteoric showers and crushed in the crater
cavities; comets had dried up the water; comets had whisked off the
atmosphere; comets had done everything. All pure assumption! In your
case, however, friend Michael, no comet whatever is necessary. The shock
that gave rise to your great 'star' may have come from the interior
rather than the exterior. A violent contraction of the lunar crust in
the process of cooling may have given birth to your gigantic 'star'
formation."

"I accept the amendment," said Ardan, now in the best of humor and
looking triumphantly at M'Nicholl.

"An English scientist," continued Barbican, "Nasmyth by name, is
decidedly of your opinion, especially ever since a little experiment of
his own has confirmed him in it. He filled a glass globe with water,
hermetically sealed it, and then plunged it into a hot bath. The
enclosed water, expanding at a greater rate than the glass, burst the
latter, but, in doing so, it made a vast number of cracks all diverging
in every direction from the focus of disruption. Something like this he
conceives to have taken place around _Tycho_. As the crust cooled, it
cracked. The lava from the interior, oozing out, spread itself on both
sides of the cracks. This certainly explains pretty satisfactorily why
those flat glistening streaks are of much greater width than the
fissures through which the lava had at first made its way to the
surface."

"Well done for an Englishman!" cried Ardan in great spirits.

"He's no Englishman," said M'Nicholl, glad to have an opportunity of
coming off with some credit. "He is the famous Scotch engineer who
invented the steam hammer, the steam ram, and discovered the 'willow
leaves' in the Sun's disc."

"Better and better," said Ardan--"but, powers of Vulcan! What makes it
so hot? I'm actually roasting!"

This observation was hardly necessary to make his companions conscious
that by this time they felt extremely uncomfortable. The heat had become
quite oppressive. Between the natural caloric of the Sun and the
reflected caloric of the Moon, the Projectile was fast turning into a
regular bake oven. This transition from intense cold to intense heat was
already about quite as much as they could bear.

"What shall we do, Barbican?" asked Ardan, seeing that for some time no
one else appeared inclined to say a word.

"Nothing, at least yet awhile, friend Ardan," replied Barbican, "I have
been watching the thermometer carefully for the last few minutes, and,
though we are at present at 38° centigrade, or 100° Fahrenheit, I have
noticed that the mercury is slowly falling. You can also easily remark
for yourself that the floor of the Projectile is turning away more and
more from the lunar surface. From this I conclude quite confidently, and
I see that the Captain agrees with me, that all danger of death from
intense heat, though decidedly alarming ten minutes ago, is over for the
present and, for some time at least, it may be dismissed from further
consideration."

"I'm not very sorry for it," said Ardan cheerfully; "neither to be
baked like a pie in an oven nor roasted like a fat goose before a fire
is the kind of death I should like to die of."

"Yet from such a death you would suffer no more than your friends the
Selenites are exposed to every day of their lives," said the Captain,
evidently determined on getting up an argument.

"I understand the full bearing of your allusion, my dear Captain,"
replied Ardan quickly, but not at all in a tone showing that he was
disposed to second M'Nicholl's expectations.

He was, in fact, fast losing all his old habits of positivism. Latterly
he had seen much, but he had reflected more. The deeper he had
reflected, the more inclined he had become to accept the conclusion that
the less he knew. Hence he had decided that if M'Nicholl wanted an
argument it should not be with him. All speculative disputes he should
henceforth avoid; he would listen with pleasure to all that could be
urged on each side; he might even skirmish a little here and there as
the spirit moved him; but a regular pitched battle on a subject purely
speculative he was fully determined never again to enter into.

"Yes, dear Captain," he continued, "that pointed arrow of yours has by
no means missed its mark, but I can't deny that my faith is beginning to
be what you call a little 'shaky' in the existence of my friends the
Selenites. However, I should like to have your square opinion on the
matter. Barbican's also. We have witnessed many strange lunar phenomena
lately, closer and clearer than mortal eye ever rested on them before.
Has what we have seen confirmed any theory of yours or confounded any
hypothesis? Have you seen enough to induce you to adopt decided
conclusions? I will put the question formally. Do you, or do you not,
think that the Moon resembles the Earth in being the abode of animals
and intelligent beings? Come, answer, _messieurs_. Yes, or no?"

"I think we can answer your question categorically," replied Barbican,
"if you modify its form a little."

"Put the question any way you please," said Ardan; "only you answer it!
I'm not particular about the form."

"Good," said Barbican; "the question, being a double one, demands a
double answer. First: _Is the Moon inhabitable?_ Second: _Has the Moon
ever been inhabited?_"

"That's the way to go about it," said the Captain. "Now then, Ardan,
what do _you_ say to the first question? Yes, or no?"

"I really can't say anything," replied Ardan. "In the presence of such
distinguished scientists, I'm only a listener, a 'mere looker on in
Vienna' as the Divine Williams has it. However, for the sake of
argument, suppose I reply in the affirmative, and say that _the Moon is
inhabitable_."

"If you do, I shall most unhesitatingly contradict you," said Barbican,
feeling just then in splendid humor for carrying on an argument, not, of
course, for the sake of contradicting or conquering or crushing or
showing off or for any other vulgar weakness of lower minds, but for the
noble and indeed the only motive that should impel a philosopher--that
of _enlightening_ and _convincing_, "In taking the negative side,
however, or saying that the Moon is not inhabitable, I shall not be
satisfied with merely negative arguments. Many words, however, are not
required. Look at her present condition: her atmosphere dwindled away to
the lowest ebb; her 'seas' dried up or very nearly so; her waters
reduced to next to nothing; her vegetation, if existing at all, existing
only on the scantiest scale; her transitions from intense heat to
intense cold, as we ourselves can testify, sudden in the extreme; her
nights and her days each nearly 360 hours long. With all this positively
against her and nothing at all that we know of positively for her, I
have very little hesitation in saying that the Moon appears to me to be
absolutely uninhabitable. She seems to me not only unpropitious to the
development of the animal kingdom but actually incapable of sustaining
life at all--that is, in the sense that we usually attach to such a
term."

"That saving clause is well introduced, friend Barbican," said
M'Nicholl, who, seeing no chance of demolishing Ardan, had not yet made
up his mind as to having another little bout with the President. "For
surely you would not venture to assert that the Moon is uninhabitable by
a race of beings having an organization different from ours?"

"That question too, Captain," replied Barbican, "though a much more
difficult one, I shall try to answer. First, however, let us see,
Captain, if we agree on some fundamental points. How do we detect the
existence of life? Is it not by _movement_? Is not _motion_ its result,
no matter what may be its organization?"

"Well," said the Captain in a drawling way, "I guess we may grant that."

"Then, dear friends," resumed Barbican, "I must remind you that, though
we have had the privilege of observing the lunar continents at a
distance of not more than one-third of a mile, we have never yet caught
sight of the first thing moving on her surface. The presence of
humanity, even of the lowest type, would have revealed itself in some
form or other, by boundaries, by buildings, even by ruins. Now what
_have_ we seen? Everywhere and always, the geological works of _nature_;
nowhere and never, the orderly labors of _man_. Therefore, if any
representatives of animal life exist in the Moon, they must have taken
refuge in those bottomless abysses where our eyes were unable to track
them. And even this I can't admit. They could not always remain in these
cavities. If there is any atmosphere at all in the Moon, it must be
found in her immense low-lying plains. Over those plains her inhabitants
must have often passed, and on those plains they must in some way or
other have left some mark, some trace, some vestige of their existence,
were it even only a road. But you both know well that nowhere are any
such traces visible: therefore, they don't exist; therefore, no lunar
inhabitants exist--except, of course, such a race of beings, if we can
imagine any such, as could exist without revealing their existence by
_movement_."

"That is to say," broke in Ardan, to give what he conceived a sharper
point to Barbican's cogent arguments, "such a race of beings as could
exist without existing!"

"Precisely," said Barbican: "Life without movement, and no life at all,
are equivalent expressions."

"Captain," said Ardan, with all the gravity he could assume, "have you
anything more to say before the Moderator of our little Debating Society
gives his opinion on the arguments regarding the question before the
house?"

"No more at present," said the Captain, biding his time.

"Then," resumed Ardan, rising with much dignity, "the Committee on Lunar
Explorations, appointed by the Honorable Baltimore Gun Club, solemnly
assembled in the Projectile belonging to the aforesaid learned and
respectable Society, having carefully weighed all the arguments advanced
on each side of the question, and having also carefully considered all
the new facts bearing on the case that have lately come under the
personal notice of said Committee, unanimously decides negatively on the
question now before the chair for investigation--namely, 'Is the Moon
inhabitable?' Barbican, as chairman of the Committee, I empower you to
duly record our solemn decision--_No, the Moon is not inhabitable_."

Barbican, opening his note-book, made the proper entry among the minutes
of the meeting of December 6th.

"Now then, gentlemen," continued Ardan, "if you are ready for the second
question, the necessary complement of the first, we may as well approach
it at once. I propound it for discussion in the following form: _Has the
Moon ever been inhabited?_ Captain, the Committee would be delighted to
hear your remarks on the subject."

"Gentlemen," began the Captain in reply, "I had formed my opinion
regarding the ancient inhabitability of our Satellite long before I ever
dreamed of testing my theory by anything like our present journey. I
will now add that all our observations, so far made, have only served to
confirm me in my opinion. I now venture to assert, not only with every
kind of probability in my favor but also on what I consider most
excellent arguments, that the Moon was once inhabited by a race of
beings possessing an organization similar to our own, that she once
produced animals anatomically resembling our terrestrial animals, and
that all these living organizations, human and animal, have had their
day, that that day vanished ages and ages ago, and that, consequently,
_Life_, extinguished forever, can never again reveal its existence there
under any form."

"Is the Chair," asked Ardan, "to infer from the honorable gentleman's
observations that he considers the Moon to be a world much older than
the Earth?"

"Not exactly that," replied the Captain without hesitation; "I rather
mean to say that the Moon is a world that grew old more rapidly than the
Earth; that it came to maturity earlier; that it ripened quicker, and
was stricken with old age sooner. Owing to the difference of the volumes
of the two worlds, the organizing forces of matter must have been
comparatively much more violent in the interior of the Moon than in the
interior of the Earth. The present condition of its surface, as we see
it lying there beneath us at this moment, places this assertion beyond
all possibility of doubt. Wrinkled, pitted, knotted, furrowed, scarred,
nothing that we can show on Earth resembles it. Moon and Earth were
called into existence by the Creator probably at the same period of
time. In the first stages of their existence, they do not seem to have
been anything better than masses of gas. Acted upon by various forces
and various influences, all of course directed by an omnipotent
intelligence, these gases by degrees became liquid, and the liquids grew
condensed into solids until solidity could retain its shape. But the two
heavenly bodies, though starting at the same time, developed at a very
different ratio. Most undoubtedly, our globe was still gaseous or at
most only liquid, at the period when the Moon, already hardened by
cooling, began to become inhabitable."

"_Most undoubtedly_ is good!" observed Ardan admiringly.

"At this period," continued the learned Captain, "an atmosphere
surrounded her. The waters, shut in by this gaseous envelope, could no
longer evaporate. Under the combined influences of air, water, light,
and solar heat as well as internal heat, vegetation began to overspread
the continents by this time ready to receive it, and most undoubtedly--I
mean--a--incontestably--it was at this epoch that _life_ manifested
itself on the lunar surface. I say _incontestably_ advisedly, for Nature
never exhausts herself in producing useless things, and therefore a
world, so wonderfully inhabitable, _must_ of necessity have had
inhabitants."

"I like _of necessity_ too," said Ardan, who could never keep still; "I
always did, when I felt my arguments to be what you call a little
shaky."

"But, my dear Captain," here observed Barbican, "have you taken into
consideration some of the peculiarities of our Satellite which are
decidedly opposed to the development of vegetable and animal existence?
Those nights and days, for instance, 354 hours long?"

"I have considered them all," answered the brave Captain. "Days and
nights of such an enormous length would at the present time, I grant,
give rise to variations in temperature altogether intolerable to any
ordinary organization. But things were quite different in the era
alluded to. At that time, the atmosphere enveloped the Moon in a gaseous
mantle, and the vapors took the shape of clouds. By the screen thus
formed by the hand of nature, the heat of the solar rays was tempered
and the nocturnal radiation retarded. Light too, as well as heat, could
be modified, tempered, and _genialized_ if I may use the expression, by
the air. This produced a healthy counterpoise of forces, which, now that
the atmosphere has completely disappeared, of course exists no longer.
Besides--friend Ardan, you will excuse me for telling you something new,
something that will surprise you--"

--"Surprise me, my dear boy, fire away surprising me!" cried Ardan. "I
like dearly to be surprised. All I regret is that you scientists have
surprised me so much already that I shall never have a good, hearty,
genuine surprise again!"

--"I am most firmly convinced," continued the Captain, hardly waiting
for Ardan to finish, "that, at the period of the Moon's occupancy by
living creatures, her days and nights were by no means 354 hours long."

"Well! if anything could surprise me," said Ardan quickly, "such an
assertion as that most certainly would. On what does the honorable
gentleman base his _most firm conviction_?"

"We know," replied the Captain, "that the reason of the Moon's present
long day and night is the exact equality of the periods of her rotation
on her axis and of her revolution around the Earth. When she has turned
once around the Earth, she has turned once around herself. Consequently,
her back is turned to the Sun during one-half of the month; and her face
during the other half. Now, I don't believe that this state of things
existed at the period referred to."

"The gentleman does not believe!" exclaimed Ardan. "The Chair must be
excused for reminding the honorable gentleman that it can not accept his
incredulity as a sound and valid argument. These two movements have
certainly equal periods now; why not always?"

"For the simple reason that this equality of periods is due altogether
to the influence of terrestrial attraction," replied the ready Captain.
"This attraction at present, I grant, is so great that it actually
disables the Moon from revolving on herself; consequently she must
always keep the same face turned towards the Earth. But who can assert
that this attraction was powerful enough to exert the same influence at
the epoch when the Earth herself was only a fluid substance? In fact,
who can even assert that the Moon has always been the Earth's
satellite?"

"Ah, who indeed?" exclaimed Ardan. "And who can assert that the Moon did
not exist long before the Earth was called into being at all? In fact,
who can assert that the Earth itself is not a great piece broken off the
Moon? Nothing like asking absurd questions! I've often found them
passing for the best kind of arguments!"

"Friend Ardan," interposed Barbican, who noticed that the Captain was a
little too disconcerted to give a ready reply; "Friend Ardan, I must say
you are not quite wrong in showing how certain methods of reasoning,
legitimate enough in themselves, may be easily abused by being carried
too far. I think, however, that the Captain might maintain his position
without having recourse to speculations altogether too gigantic for
ordinary intellect. By simply admitting the insufficiency of the
primordeal attraction to preserve a perfect balance between the
movements of the lunar rotation and revolution, we can easily see how
the nights and days could once succeed each other on the Moon exactly as
they do at present on the Earth."

"Nothing can be clearer!" resumed the brave Captain, once more rushing
to the charge. "Besides, even without this alternation of days and
nights, life on the lunar surface was quite possible."

"Of course it was possible," said Ardan; "everything is possible except
what contradicts itself. It is possible too that every possibility is a
fact; therefore, it _is_ a fact. However," he added, not wishing to
press the Captain's weak points too closely, "let all these logical
niceties pass for the present. Now that you have established the
existence of your humanity in the Moon, the Chair would respectfully ask
how it has all so completely disappeared?"

"It disappeared completely thousands, perhaps millions, of years ago,"
replied the unabashed Captain. "It perished from the physical
impossibility of living any longer in a world where the atmosphere had
become by degrees too rare to be able to perform its functions as the
great resuscitating medium of dependent existences. What took place on
the Moon is only what is to take place some day or other on the Earth,
when it is sufficiently cooled off."

"Cooled off?"

"Yes," replied the Captain as confidently and with as little hesitation
as if he was explaining some of the details of his great machine-shop in
Philadelphia; "You see, according as the internal fire near the surface
was extinguished or was withdrawn towards the centre, the lunar shell
naturally cooled off. The logical consequences, of course, then
gradually took place: extinction of organized beings; and then
extinction of vegetation. The atmosphere, in the meantime, became
thinner and thinner--partly drawn off with the water evaporated by the
terrestrial attraction, and partly sinking with the solid water into the
crust-cracks caused by cooling. With the disappearance of air capable of
respiration, and of water capable of motion, the Moon, of course, became
uninhabitable. From that day it became the abode of death, as completely
as it is at the present moment."

"That is the fate in store for our Earth?"

"In all probability."

"And when is it to befall us?"

"Just as soon as the crust becomes cold enough to be uninhabitable."

"Perhaps your philosophership has taken the trouble to calculate how
many years it will take our unfortunate _Terra Mater_ to cool off?"

"Well; I have."

"And you can rely on your figures?"

"Implicitly."

"Why not tell it at once then to a fellow that's dying of impatience to
know all about it? Captain, the Chair considers you one of the most
tantalizing creatures in existence!"

"If you only listen, you will hear," replied M'Nicholl quietly. "By
careful observations, extended through a series of many years, men have
been able to discover the average loss of temperature endured by the
Earth in a century. Taking this as the ground work of their
calculations, they have ascertained that our Earth shall become an
uninhabitable planet in about--"

"Don't cut her life too short! Be merciful!" cried Ardan in a pleading
tone half in earnest. "Come, a good long day, your Honor! A good long
day!"

"The planet that we call the Earth," continued the Captain, as grave as
a judge, "will become uninhabitable to human beings, after a lapse of
400 thousand years from the present time."

"Hurrah!" cried Ardan, much relieved. "_Vive la Science!_ Henceforward,
what miscreant will persist in saying that the Savants are good for
nothing? Proudly pointing to this calculation, can't they exclaim to all
defamers: 'Silence, croakers! Our services are invaluable! Haven't we
insured the Earth for 400 thousand years?' Again I say _vive la
Science!_"

"Ardan," began the Captain with some asperity, "the foundations on
which Science has raised--"

"I'm half converted already," interrupted Ardan in a cheery tone; "I do
really believe that Science is not altogether unmitigated homebogue!
_Vive_--"

--"But what has all this to do with the question under discussion?"
interrupted Barbican, desirous to keep his friends from losing their
tempers in idle disputation.

"True!" said Ardan. "The Chair, thankful for being called to order,
would respectfully remind the house that the question before it is: _Has
the Moon been inhabited?_ Affirmative has been heard. Negative is called
on to reply. Mr. Barbican has the _parole_."

But Mr. Barbican was unwilling just then to enter too deeply into such
an exceedingly difficult subject. "The probabilities," he contented
himself with saying, "would appear to be in favor of the Captain's
speculations. But we must never forget that they _are_
speculations--nothing more. Not the slightest evidence has yet been
produced that the Moon is anything else than 'a dead and useless waste
of extinct volcanoes.' No signs of cities, no signs of buildings, not
even of ruins, none of anything that could be reasonably ascribed to the
labors of intelligent creatures. No sign of change of any kind has been
established. As for the agreement between the Moon's rotation and her
revolution, which compels her to keep the same face constantly turned
towards the Earth, we don't know that it has not existed from the
beginning. As for what is called the effect of volcanic agency upon her
surface, we don't know that her peculiar blistered appearance may not
have been brought about altogether by the bubbling and spitting that
blisters molten iron when cooling and contracting. Some close observers
have even ventured to account for her craters by saying they were due to
pelting showers of meteoric rain. Then again as to her atmosphere--why
should she have lost her atmosphere? Why should it sink into craters?
Atmosphere is gas, great in volume, small in matter; where would there
be room for it? Solidified by the intense cold? Possibly in the night
time. But would not the heat of the long day be great enough to thaw it
back again? The same trouble attends the alleged disappearance of the
water. Swallowed up in the cavernous cracks, it is said. But why are
there cracks? Cooling is not always attended by cracking. Water cools
without cracking; cannon balls cool without cracking. Too much stress
has been laid on the great difference between the _nucleus_ and the
_crust_: it is really impossible to say where one ends and the other
begins. In fact, no theory explains satisfactorily anything regarding
the present state of the Moon's surface. In fact, from the day that
Galileo compared her clustering craters to 'eyes on a peacock's tail' to
the present time, we must acknowledge that we know nothing more than we
can actually see, not one particle more of the Moon's history than our
telescopes reveal to our corporal eyes!"

"In the lucid opinion of the honorable and learned gentleman who spoke
last," said Ardan, "the Chair is compelled to concur. Therefore, as to
the second question before the house for deliberation, _Has the Moon
been ever inhabited?_ the Chair gets out of its difficulty, as a Scotch
jury does when it has not evidence enough either way, by returning a
solemn verdict of _Not Proven!_"

"And with this conclusion," said Barbican, hastily rising, "of a subject
on which, to tell the truth, we are unable as yet to throw any light
worth speaking of, let us be satisfied for the present. Another question
of greater moment to us just now is: where are we? It seems to me that
we are increasing our distance from the Moon very decidedly and very
rapidly."

It was easy to see that he was quite right in this observation. The
Projectile, still following a northerly course and therefore approaching
the lunar equator, was certainly getting farther and farther from the
Moon. Even at 30° S., only ten degrees farther north than the latitude
of _Tycho_, the travellers had considerable difficulty, comparatively,
in observing the details of _Pitatus_, a walled mountain on the south
shores of the _Mare Nubium_. In the "sea" itself, over which they now
floated, they could see very little, but far to the left, on the 20th
parallel, they could discern the vast crater of _Bullialdus_, 9,000
feet deep. On the right, they had just caught a glimpse of _Purbach_, a
depressed valley almost square in shape with a round crater in the
centre, when Ardan suddenly cried out:

"A Railroad!"

And, sure enough, right under them, a little northeast of _Purbach_, the
travellers easily distinguished a long line straight and black, really
not unlike a railroad cutting through a low hilly country.

This, Barbican explained, was of course no railway, but a steep cliff,
at least 1,000 feet high, casting a very deep shadow, and probably the
result of the caving in of the surface on the eastern edge.

Then they saw the immense crater of _Arzachel_ and in its midst a cone
mountain shining with dazzling splendor. A little north of this, they
could detect the outlines of another crater, _Alphonse_, at least 70
miles in diameter. Close to it they could easily distinguish the immense
crater or, as some observers call it, Ramparted Plain, _Ptolemy_, so
well known to lunar astronomers, occupying, as it does, such a favorable
position near the centre of the Moon, and having a diameter fully, in
one direction at least, 120 miles long.

The travellers were now in about the same latitude as that at which they
had at first approached the Moon, and it was here that they began most
unquestionably to leave her. They looked and looked, readjusting their
glasses, but the details were becoming more and more difficult to catch.
The reliefs grew more and more blurred and the outlines dimmer and
dimmer. Even the great mountain profiles began to fade away, the
dazzling colors to grow duller, the jet black shadows greyer, and the
general effect mistier.

At last, the distance had become so great that, of this lunar world so
wonderful, so fantastic, so weird, so mysterious, our travellers by
degrees lost even the consciousness, and their sensations, lately so
vivid, grew fainter and fainter, until finally they resembled those of a
man who is suddenly awakened from a peculiarly strange and impressive
dream.




CHAPTER XIX.

IN EVERY FIGHT, THE IMPOSSIBLE WINS.


No matter what we have been accustomed to, it is sad to bid it farewell
forever. The glimpse of the Moon's wondrous world imparted to Barbican
and his companions had been, like that of the Promised Land to Moses on
Mount Pisgah, only a distant and a dark one, yet it was with
inexpressibly mournful eyes that, silent and thoughtful, they now
watched her fading away slowly from their view, the conviction
impressing itself deeper and deeper in their souls that, slight as their
acquaintance had been, it was never to be renewed again. All doubt on
the subject was removed by the position gradually, but decidedly,
assumed by the Projectile. Its base was turning away slowly and steadily
from the Moon, and pointing surely and unmistakably towards the Earth.

Barbican had been long carefully noticing this modification, but without
being able to explain it. That the Projectile should withdraw a long
distance from the Moon and still be her satellite, he could understand;
but, being her satellite, why not present towards her its heaviest
segment, as the Moon does towards the Earth? That was the point which he
could not readily clear up.

By carefully noting its path, he thought he could see that the
Projectile, though now decidedly leaving the Moon, still followed a
curve exactly analogous to that by which it had approached her. It must
therefore be describing a very elongated ellipse, which might possibly
extend even to the neutral point where the lunar and terrestrial
attractions were mutually overcome.

With this surmise of Barbican's, his companions appeared rather disposed
to agree, though, of course, it gave rise to new questions.

"Suppose we reach this dead point," asked Ardan; "what then is to become
of us?"

"Can't tell!" was Barbican's unsatisfactory reply.

"But you can form a few hypotheses?"

"Yes, two!"

"Let us have them."

"The velocity will be either sufficient to carry us past the dead point,
or it will not: sufficient, we shall keep on, just as we are now,
gravitating forever around the Moon--"

--"Hypothesis number two will have at least one point in its favor,"
interrupted as usual the incorrigible Ardan; "it can't be worse than
hypothesis number one!"

--"Insufficient," continued Barbican, laying down the law, "we shall
rest forever motionless on the dead point of the mutually neutralizing
attractions."

"A pleasant prospect!" observed Ardan: "from the worst possible to no
better! Isn't it, Barbican?"

"Nothing to say," was Barbican's only reply.

"Have you nothing to say either, Captain?" asked Ardan, beginning to be
a little vexed at the apparent apathy of his companions.

"Nothing whatever," replied M'Nicholl, giving point to his words by a
despairing shake of his head.

"You don't mean surely that we're going to sit here, like bumps on a
log, doing nothing until it will be too late to attempt anything?"

"Nothing whatever can be done," said Barbican gloomily. "It is vain to
struggle against the impossible."

"Impossible! Where did you get that word? I thought the American
schoolboys had cut it out of their dictionaries!"

"That must have been since my time," said Barbican smiling grimly.

"It still sticks in a few old copies anyhow," drawled M'Nicholl drily,
as he carefully wiped his glasses.

"Well! it has no business _here_!" said Ardan. "What! A pair of live
Yankees and a Frenchman, of the nineteenth century too, recoil before an
old fashioned word that hardly scared our grandfathers!"

"What can we do?"

"Correct the movement that's now running away with us!"

"Correct it?"

"Certainly, correct it! or modify it! or clap brakes on it! or take
some advantage of it that will be in our favor! What matters the exact
term so you comprehend me?"

"Easy talking!"

"As easy doing!"

"Doing what? Doing how?"

"The what, and the how, is your business, not mine! What kind of an
artillery man is he who can't master his bullets? The gunner who cannot
command his own gun should be rammed into it head foremost himself and
blown from its mouth! A nice pair of savants _you_ are! There you sit as
helpless as a couple of babies, after having inveigled me--"

"Inveigled!!" cried Barbican and M'Nicholl starting to their feet in an
instant; "WHAT!!!"

"Come, come!" went on Ardan, not giving his indignant friends time to
utter a syllable; "I don't want any recrimination! I'm not the one to
complain! I'll even let up a little if you consider the expression too
strong! I'll even withdraw it altogether, and assert that the trip
delights me! that the Projectile is a thing after my own heart! that I
was never in better spirits than at the present moment! I don't
complain, I only appeal to your own good sense, and call upon you with
all my voice to do everything possible, so that we may go _somewhere_,
since it appears we can't get to the Moon!"

"But that's exactly what we want to do ourselves, friend Ardan," said
Barbican, endeavoring to give an example of calmness to the impatient
M'Nicholl; "the only trouble is that we have not the means to do it."

"Can't we modify the Projectile's movement?"

"No."

"Nor diminish its velocity?"

"No."

"Not even by lightening it, as a heavily laden ship is lightened, by
throwing cargo overboard?"

"What can we throw overboard? We have no ballast like balloon-men."

"I should like to know," interrupted M'Nicholl, "what would be the good
of throwing anything at all overboard. Any one with a particle of common
sense in his head, can see that the lightened Projectile should only
move the quicker!"

"Slower, you mean," said Ardan.

"Quicker, I mean," replied the Captain.

"Neither quicker nor slower, dear friends," interposed Barbican,
desirous to stop a quarrel; "we are floating, you know, in an absolute
void, where specific gravity never counts."

"Well then, my friends," said Ardan in a resigned tone that he evidently
endeavored to render calm, "since the worst is come to the worst, there
is but one thing left for us to do!"

"What's that?" said the Captain, getting ready to combat some new piece
of nonsense.

"To take our breakfast!" said the Frenchman curtly.

It was a resource he had often fallen back on in difficult
conjunctures. Nor did it fail him now.

Though it was not a project that claimed to affect either the velocity
or the direction of the Projectile, still, as it was eminently
practicable and not only unattended by no inconvenience on the one hand
but evidently fraught with many advantages on the other, it met with
decided and instantaneous success. It was rather an early hour for
breakfast, two o'clock in the morning, yet the meal was keenly relished.
Ardan served it up in charming style and crowned the dessert with a few
bottles of a wine especially selected for the occasion from his own
private stock. It was a _Tokay Imperial_ of 1863, the genuine _Essenz_,
from Prince Esterhazy's own wine cellar, and the best brain stimulant
and brain clearer in the world, as every connoisseur knows.

It was near four o'clock in the morning when our travellers, now well
fortified physically and morally, once more resumed their observations
with renewed courage and determination, and with a system of recording
really perfect in its arrangements.

Around the Projectile, they could still see floating most of the objects
that had been dropped out of the window. This convinced them that,
during their revolution around the Moon, they had not passed through any
atmosphere; had anything of the kind been encountered, it would have
revealed its presence by its retarding effect on the different objects
that now followed close in the wake of the Projectile. One or two that
were missing had been probably struck and carried off by a fragment of
the exploded bolide.

Of the Earth nothing as yet could be seen. She was only one day Old,
having been New the previous evening, and two days were still to elapse
before her crescent would be sufficiently cleared of the solar rays to
be capable of performing her ordinary duty of serving as a time-piece
for the Selenites. For, as the reflecting reader need hardly be
reminded, since she rotates with perfect regularity on her axis, she can
make such rotations visible to the Selenites by bringing some particular
point on her surface once every twenty-four hours directly over the same
lunar meridian.

Towards the Moon, the view though far less distinct, was still almost as
dazzling as ever. The radiant Queen of Night still glittered in all her
splendor in the midst of the starry host, whose pure white light seemed
to borrow only additional purity and silvery whiteness from the gorgeous
contrast. On her disc, the "seas" were already beginning to assume the
ashy tint so well known to us on Earth, but the rest of her surface
sparkled with all its former radiation, _Tycho_ glowing like a sun in
the midst of the general resplendescence.

Barbican attempted in vain to obtain even a tolerable approximation of
the velocity at which the Projectile was now moving. He had to content
himself with the knowledge that it was diminishing at a uniform rate--of
which indeed a little reflection on a well known law of Dynamics readily
convinced him. He had not much difficulty even in explaining the matter
to his friends.

"Once admitting," said he, "the Projectile to describe an orbit round
the Moon, that orbit must of necessity be an ellipse. Every moving body
circulating regularly around another, describes an ellipse. Science has
proved this incontestably. The satellites describe ellipses around the
planets, the planets around the Sun, the Sun himself describes an
ellipse around the unknown star that serves as a pivot for our whole
solar system. How can our Baltimore Gun Club Projectile then escape the
universal law?

"Now what is the consequence of this law? If the orbit were a _circle_,
the satellite would always preserve the same distance from its primary,
and its velocity should therefore be constant. But the orbit being an
_ellipse_, and the attracting body always occupying one of the foci, the
satellite must evidently lie nearer to this focus in one part of its
orbit than in another. The Earth when nearest to the Sun, is in her
_perihelion_; when most distant, in her _aphelion_. The Moon, with
regard to the Earth, is similarly in her _perigee_, and her _apogee_.
Analogous expressions denoting the relations of the Projectile towards
the Moon, would be _periselene_ and _aposelene_. At its _aposelene_ the
Projectile's velocity would have reached its minimum; at
the _periselene_, its maximum. As it is to the former point that we are
now moving, clearly the velocity must keep on diminishing until that
point is reached. Then, _if it does not die out altogether_, it must
spring up again, and even accelerate as it reapproaches the Moon. Now
the great trouble is this: If the _Aposelenetic_ point should coincide
with the point of lunar attraction, our velocity must certainly become
_nil_, and the Projectile must remain relatively motionless forever!"

"What do you mean by 'relatively motionless'?" asked M'Nicholl, who was
carefully studying the situation.

"I mean, of course, not absolutely motionless," answered Barbican;
"absolute immobility is, as you are well aware, altogether impossible,
but motionless with regard to the Earth and the--"

"By Mahomet's jackass!" interrupted Ardan hastily, "I must say we're a
precious set of _imbéciles_!"

"I don't deny it, dear friend," said Barbican quietly, notwithstanding
the unceremonious interruption; "but why do you say so just now?"

"Because though we are possessed of the power of retarding the velocity
that takes us from the Moon, we have never thought of employing it!"

"What do you mean?"

"Do you forget the rockets?"

"It's a fact!" cried M'Nicholl. "How have we forgotten them?"

"I'm sure I can't tell," answered Barbican, "unless, perhaps, because we
had too many other things to think about. Your thought, my dear friend,
is a most happy one, and, of course, we shall utilize it."

"When? How soon?"

"At the first favorable opportunity, not sooner. For you can see for
yourselves, dear friends," he went on explaining, "that with the present
obliquity of the Projectile with regard to the lunar disc, a discharge
of our rockets would be more likely to send us away from the Moon than
towards her. Of course, you are both still desirous of reaching the
Moon?"

"Most emphatically so!"

"Then by reserving our rockets for the last chance, we may possibly get
there after all. In consequence of some force, to me utterly
inexplicable, the Projectile still seems disposed to turn its base
towards the Earth. In fact, it is likely enough that at the neutral
point its cone will point vertically to the Moon. That being the moment
when its velocity will most probably be _nil_, it will also be the
moment for us to discharge our rockets, and the possibility is that we
may force a direct fall on the lunar disc."

"Good!" cried Ardan, clapping hands.

"Why didn't we execute this grand manoeuvre the first time we reached
the neutral point?" asked M'Nicholl a little crustily.

"It would be useless," answered Barbican; "the Projectile's velocity at
that time, as you no doubt remember, not only did not need rockets, but
was actually too great to be affected by them."

"True!" chimed in Ardan; "a wind of four miles an hour is very little
use to a steamer going ten."

"That assertion," cried M'Nicholl, "I am rather dis--"

--"Dear friends," interposed Barbican, his pale face beaming and his
clear voice ringing with the new excitement; "let us just now waste no
time in mere words. We have one more chance, perhaps a great one. Let us
not throw it away! We have been on the brink of despair--"

--"Beyond it!" cried Ardan.

--"But I now begin to see a possibility, nay, a very decided
probability, of our being able to attain the great end at last!"

"Bravo!" cried Ardan.

"Hurrah!" cried M'Nicholl.

"Yes! my brave boys!" cried Barbican as enthusiastically as his
companions; "all's not over yet by a long shot!"

What had brought about this great revulsion in the spirits of our bold
adventurers? The breakfast? Prince Esterhazy's Tokay? The latter, most
probably. What had become of the resolutions they had discussed so ably
and passed so decidedly a few hours before? _Was the Moon inhabited? No!
Was the Moon habitable? No!_ Yet in the face of all this--or rather as
coolly as if such subjects had never been alluded to--here were the
reckless scientists actually thinking of nothing but how to work heaven
and earth in order to get there!

One question more remained to be answered before they played their last
trump, namely: "At what precise moment would the Projectile reach the
neutral point?"

To this Barbican had very little trouble in finding an answer. The time
spent in proceeding from the south pole to the dead point being
evidently equal to the time previously spent in proceeding from the dead
point to the north pole--to ascertain the former, he had only to
calculate the latter. This was easily done. To refer to his notes, to
check off the different rates of velocity at which they had readied the
different parallels, and to turn these rates into time, required only a
very few minutes careful calculation. The Projectile then was to reach
the point of neutral attraction at one o'clock in the morning of
December 8th. At the present time, it was five o'clock in the morning of
the 7th; therefore, if nothing unforeseen should occur in the meantime,
their great and final effort was to be made about twenty hours later.

The rockets, so often alluded to as an idea of Ardan's and already fully
described, had been originally provided to break the violence of the
Projectile's fall on the lunar surface; but now the dauntless travellers
were about to employ them for a purpose precisely the reverse. In any
case, having been put in proper order for immediate use, nothing more
now remained to be done till the moment should come for firing them off.

"Now then, friends," said M'Nicholl, rubbing his eyes but hardly able to
keep them open, "I'm not over fond of talking, but this time I think I
may offer a slight proposition."

"We shall be most happy to entertain it, my dear Captain," said
Barbican.

[Illustration: ARDAN GAZED ON THE PAIR.]

"I propose we lie down and take a good nap."

"Good gracious!" protested Ardan; "What next?"

"We have not had a blessed wink for forty hours," continued the Captain;
"a little sleep would recuperate us wonderfully."

"No sleep now!" exclaimed Ardan.

"Every man to his taste!" said M'Nicholl; "mine at present is certainly
to turn in!" and suiting the action to the word, he coiled himself on
the sofa, and in a few minutes his deep regular breathing showed his
slumber to be as tranquil as an infant's.

Barbican looked at him in a kindly way, but only for a very short time;
his eyes grew so filmy that he could not keep them open any longer. "The
Captain," he said, "may not be without his little faults, but for good
practical sense he is worth a ship-load like you and me, Ardan. By Jove,
I'm going to imitate him, and, friend Michael, you might do worse!"

In a short time he was as unconscious as the Captain.

Ardan gazed on the pair for a few minutes, and then began to feel quite
lonely. Even his animals were fast asleep. He tried to look out, but
observing without having anybody to listen to your observations, is dull
work. He looked again at the sleeping pair, and then he gave in.

"It can't be denied," he muttered, slowly nodding his head, "that even
your practical men sometimes stumble on a good idea."

Then curling up his long legs, and folding his arms under his head, his
restless brain was soon forming fantastic shapes for itself in the
mysterious land of dreams.

But his slumbers were too much disturbed to last long. After an uneasy,
restless, unrefreshing attempt at repose, he sat up at about half-past
seven o'clock, and began stretching himself, when he found his
companions already awake and discussing the situation in whispers.

The Projectile, they were remarking, was still pursuing its way from the
Moon, and turning its conical point more and more in her direction. This
latter phenomenon, though as puzzling as ever, Barbican regarded with
decided pleasure: the more directly the conical summit pointed to the
Moon at the exact moment, the more directly towards her surface would
the rockets communicate their reactionary motion.

Nearly seventeen hours, however, were still to elapse before that
moment, that all important moment, would arrive.

The time began to drag. The excitement produced by the Moon's vicinity
had died out. Our travellers, though as daring and as confident as ever,
could not help feeling a certain sinking of heart at the approach of the
moment for deciding either alternative of their doom in this
world--their fall to the Moon, or their eternal imprisonment in a
changeless orbit. Barbican and M'Nicholl tried to kill time by revising
their calculations and putting their notes in order; Ardan, by
feverishly walking back and forth from window to window, and stopping
for a second or two to throw a nervous glance at the cold, silent and
impassive Moon.

Now and then reminiscences of our lower world would flit across their
brains. Visions of the famous Gun Club rose up before them the oftenest,
with their dear friend Marston always the central figure. What was his
bustling, honest, good-natured, impetuous heart at now? Most probably he
was standing bravely at his post on the Rocky Mountains, his eye glued
to the great Telescope, his whole soul peering through its tube. Had he
seen the Projectile before it vanished behind the Moon's north pole?
Could he have caught a glimpse of it at its reappearance? If so, could
he have concluded it to be the satellite of a satellite! Could Belfast
have announced to the world such a startling piece of intelligence? Was
that all the Earth was ever to know of their great enterprise? What were
the speculations of the Scientific World upon the subject? etc., etc.

In listless questions and desultory conversation of this kind the day
slowly wore away, without the occurrence of any incident whatever to
relieve its weary monotony. Midnight arrived, December the seventh was
dead. As Ardan said: "_Le Sept Decembre est mort; vive le Huit!_" In one
hour more, the neutral point would be reached. At what velocity was the
Projectile now moving? Barbican could not exactly tell, but he felt
quite certain that no serious error had slipped into his calculations.
At one o'clock that night, _nil_ the velocity was to be, and _nil_ it
would be!

Another phenomenon, in any case, was to mark the arrival of the exact
moment. At the dead point, the two attractions, terrestrial and lunar,
would again exactly counterbalance each other. For a few seconds,
objects would no longer possess the slightest weight. This curious
circumstance, which had so much surprised and amused the travellers at
its first occurrence, was now to appear again as soon as the conditions
should become identical. During these few seconds then would come the
moment for striking the decisive blow.

They could soon notice the gradual approach of this important instant.
Objects began to weigh sensibly lighter. The conical point of the
Projectile had become almost directly under the centre of the lunar
surface. This gladdened the hearts of the bold adventurers. The recoil
of the rockets losing none of its power by oblique action, the chances
pronounced decidedly in their favor. Now, only supposing the
Projectile's velocity to be absolutely annihilated at the dead point,
the slightest force directing it towards the Moon would be _certain_ to
cause it finally to fall on her surface.

Supposing!--but supposing the contrary!

--Even these brave adventurers had not the courage to suppose the
contrary!

"Five minutes to one o'clock," said M'Nicholl, his eyes never quitting
his watch.

"Ready?" asked Barbican of Ardan.

"Ay, ay, sir!" was Ardan's reply, as he made sure that the electric
apparatus to discharge the rockets was in perfect working order.

"Wait till I give the word," said Barbican, pulling out his chronometer.

The moment was now evidently close at hand. The objects lying around had
no weight. The travellers felt their bodies to be as buoyant as a
hydrogen balloon. Barbican let go his chronometer, but it kept its place
as firmly in empty space before his eyes as if it had been nailed to the
wall!

"One o'clock!" cried Barbican in a solemn tone.

Ardan instantly touched the discharging key of the little electric
battery. A dull, dead, distant report was immediately heard,
communicated probably by the vibration of the Projectile to the internal
air. But Ardan saw through the window a long thin flash, which vanished
in a second. At the same moment, the three friends became
instantaneously conscious of a slight shock experienced by the
Projectile.

They looked at each other, speechless, breathless, for about as long as
it would take you to count five: the silence so intense that they could
easily hear the pulsation of their hearts. Ardan was the first to break
it.

"Are we falling or are we not?" he asked in a loud whisper.

"We're not!" answered M'Nicholl, also hardly speaking above his breath.
"The base of the Projectile is still turned away as far as ever from the
Moon!"

Barbican, who had been looking out of the window, now turned hastily
towards his companions. His face frightened them. He was deadly pale;
his eyes stared, and his lips were painfully contracted.

"We _are_ falling!" he shrieked huskily.

"Towards the Moon?" exclaimed his companions.

"No!" was the terrible reply. "Towards the Earth!"

"_Sacré!_" cried Ardan, as usually letting off his excitement in French.

"Fire and fury!" cried M'Nicholl, completely startled out of his
habitual _sang froid_.

"Thunder and lightning!" swore the usually serene Barbican, now
completely stunned by the blow. "I had never expected this!"

Ardan was the first to recover from the deadening shock: his levity came
to his relief.

"First impressions are always right," he muttered philosophically. "The
moment I set eyes on the confounded thing, it reminded me of the
Bastille; it is now proving its likeness to a worse place: easy enough
to get into, but no redemption out of it!"

There was no longer any doubt possible on the subject. The terrible fall
had begun. The Projectile had retained velocity enough not only to carry
it beyond the dead point, but it was even able to completely overcome
the feeble resistance offered by the rockets. It was all clear now. The
same velocity that had carried the Projectile beyond the neutral point
on its way to the Moon, was still swaying it on its return to the Earth.
A well known law of motion required that, in the path which it was now
about to describe, _it should repass, on its return through all the
points through which it had already passed during its departure_.

No wonder that our friends were struck almost senseless when the fearful
fall they were now about to encounter, flashed upon them in all its
horror. They were to fall a clear distance of nearly 200 thousand miles!
To lighten or counteract such a descent, the most powerful springs,
checks, rockets, screens, deadeners, even if the whole Earth were
engaged in their construction--would produce no more effect than so many
spiderwebs. According to a simple law in Ballistics, _the Projectile was
to strike the Earth with a velocity equal to that by which it had been
animated when issuing from the mouth of the Columbiad_--a velocity of at
least seven miles a second!

To have even a faint idea of this enormous velocity, let us make a
little comparison. A body falling from the summit of a steeple a hundred
and fifty feet high, dashes against the pavement with a velocity of
fifty five miles an hour. Falling from the summit of St. Peter's, it
strikes the earth at the rate of 300 miles an hour, or five times
quicker than the rapidest express train. Falling from the neutral
point, the Projectile should strike the Earth with a velocity of more
than 25,000 miles an hour!

"We are lost!" said M'Nicholl gloomily, his philosophy yielding to
despair.

"One consolation, boys!" cried Ardan, genial to the last. "We shall die
together!"

"If we die," said Barbican calmly, but with a kind of suppressed
enthusiasm, "it will be only to remove to a more extended sphere of our
investigations. In the other world, we can pursue our inquiries under
far more favorable auspices. There the wonders of our great Creator,
clothed in brighter light, shall be brought within a shorter range. We
shall require no machine, nor projectile, nor material contrivance of
any kind to be enabled to contemplate them in all their grandeur and to
appreciate them fully and intelligently. Our souls, enlightened by the
emanations of the Eternal Wisdom, shall revel forever in the blessed
rays of Eternal Knowledge!"

"A grand view to take of it, dear friend Barbican;" replied Ardan, "and
a consoling one too. The privilege of roaming at will through God's
great universe should make ample amends for missing the Moon!"

M'Nicholl fixed his eyes on Barbican admiringly, feebly muttering with
hardly moving lips:

"Grit to the marrow! Grit to the marrow!"

Barbican, head bowed in reverence, arms folded across his breast, meekly
and uncomplainingly uttered with sublime resignation:

"Thy will be done!"

"Amen!" answered his companions, in a loud and fervent whisper.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were soon falling through the boundless regions of space with
inconceivable rapidity!




CHAPTER XX.

OFF THE PACIFIC COAST.


"Well, Lieutenant, how goes the sounding?"

"Pretty lively, Captain; we're nearly through;" replied the Lieutenant.
"But it's a tremendous depth so near land. We can't be more than 250
miles from the California coast."

"The depression certainly is far deeper than I had expected," observed
Captain Bloomsbury. "We have probably lit on a submarine valley
channelled out by the Japanese Current."

"The Japanese Current, Captain?"

"Certainly; that branch of it which breaks on the western shores of
North America and then flows southeast towards the Isthmus of Panama."

"That may account for it, Captain," replied young Brownson; "at least, I
hope it does, for then we may expect the valley to get shallower as we
leave the land. So far, there's no sign of a Telegraphic Plateau in this
quarter of the globe."

"Probably not, Brownson. How is the line now?"

"We have paid out 3500 fathoms already, Captain, but, judging from the
rate the reel goes at, we are still some distance from bottom."

As he spoke, he pointed to a tall derrick temporarily rigged up at the
stern of the vessel for the purpose of working the sounding apparatus,
and surrounded by a group of busy men. Through a block pulley strongly
lashed to the derrick, a stout cord of the best Italian hemp, wound off
a large reel placed amidships, was now running rapidly and with a slight
whirring noise.

"I hope it's not the 'cup-lead' you are using, Brownson?" said the
Captain, after a few minutes observation.

"Oh no, Captain, certainly not," replied the Lieutenant. "It's only
Brooke's apparatus that is of any use in such depths."

"Clever fellow that Brooke," observed the Captain; "served with him
under Maury. His detachment of the weight is really the starting point
for every new improvement in sounding gear. The English, the French, and
even our own, are nothing but modifications of that fundamental
principle. Exceedingly clever fellow!"

"Bottom!" sang out one of the men standing near the derrick and watching
the operations.

The Captain and the Lieutenant immediately advanced to question him.

"What's the depth, Coleman?" asked the Lieutenant.

"21,762 feet," was the prompt reply, which Brownson immediately
inscribed in his note-book, handing a duplicate to the Captain.

"All right, Lieutenant," observed the Captain, after a moment's
inspection of the figures. "While I enter it in the log, you haul the
line aboard. To do so, I need hardly remind you, is a task involving
care and patience. In spite of all our gallant little donkey engine can
do, it's a six hours job at least. Meanwhile, the Chief Engineer had
better give orders for firing up, so that we may be ready to start as
soon as you're through. It's now close on to four bells, and with your
permission I shall turn in. Let me be called at three. Good night!"

"Goodnight, Captain!" replied Brownson, who spent the next two hours
pacing backward and forward on the quarter deck, watching the hauling in
of the sounding line, and occasionally casting a glance towards all
quarters of the sky.

It was a glorious night. The innumerable stars glittered with the
brilliancy of the purest gems. The ship, hove to in order to take the
soundings, swung gently on the faintly heaving ocean breast. You felt
you were in a tropical clime, for, though no breath fanned your cheek,
your senses easily detected the delicious odor of a distant garden of
sweet roses. The sea sparkled with phosphorescence. Not a sound was
heard except the panting of the hard-worked little donkey-engine and the
whirr of the line as it came up taut and dripping from the ocean depths.
The lamp, hanging from the mast, threw a bright glare on deck,
presenting the strongest contrast with the black shadows, firm and
motionless as marble. The 11th day of December was now near its last
hour.

The steamer was the _Susquehanna_, a screw, of the United States Navy,
4,000 in tonnage, and carrying 20 guns. She had been detached to take
soundings between the Pacific coast and the Sandwich Islands, the
initiatory movement towards laying down an Ocean Cable, which the
_Pacific Cable Company_ contemplated finally extending to China. She lay
just now a few hundred miles directly south of San Diego, an old Spanish
town in southwestern California, and the point which is expected to be
the terminus of the great _Texas and Pacific Railroad_.

The Captain, John Bloomsbury by name, but better known as 'High-Low
Jack' from his great love of that game--the only one he was ever known
to play--was a near relation of our old friend Colonel Bloomsbury of the
Baltimore Gun Club. Of a good Kentucky family, and educated at
Annapolis, he had passed his meridian without ever being heard of, when
suddenly the news that he had run the gauntlet in a little gunboat past
the terrible batteries of Island Number Ten, amidst a perfect storm of
shell, grape and canister discharged at less than a hundred yards
distance, burst on the American nation on the sixth of April, 1862, and
inscribed his name at once in deep characters on the list of the giants
of the Great War. But war had never been his vocation. With the return
of peace, he had sought and obtained employment on the Western Coast
Survey, where every thing he did he looked on as a labor of love. The
Sounding Expedition he had particularly coveted, and, once entered upon
it, he discharged his duties with characteristic energy.

He could not have had more favorable weather than the present for a
successful performance of the nice and delicate investigations of
sounding. His vessel had even been fortunate enough to have lain
altogether out of the track of the terrible wind storm already alluded
to, which, starting from somewhere southwest of the Sierra Madre, had
swept away every vestige of mist from the summits of the Rocky Mountains
and, by revealing the Moon in all her splendor, had enabled Belfast to
send the famous despatch announcing that he had seen the Projectile.
Every feature of the expedition was, in fact, advancing so favorably
that the Captain expected to be able, in a month or two, to submit to
the _P.C. Company_ a most satisfactory report of his labors.

Cyrus W. Field, the life and soul of the whole enterprise, flushed with
honors still in full bloom (the Atlantic Telegraph Cable having been
just laid), could congratulate himself with good reason on having found
a treasure in the Captain. High-Low Jack was the congenial spirit by
whose active and intelligent aid he promised himself the pleasure of
seeing before long the whole Pacific Ocean covered with a vast
reticulation of electric cables. The practical part, therefore, being in
such safe hands, Mr. Field could remain with a quiet conscience in
Washington, New York or London, seeing after the financial part of the
grand undertaking, worthy of the Nineteenth Century, worthy of the Great
Republic, and eminently worthy of the illustrious CYRUS W. himself!

As already mentioned, the _Susquehanna_ lay a few hundred miles south
of San Diego, or, to be more accurate, in 27° 7' North Latitude and 118°
37' West Longitude (Greenwich).

It was now a little past midnight. The Moon, in her last quarter, was
just beginning to peep over the eastern horizon. Lieutenant Brownson,
leaving the quarter deck, had gone to the forecastle, where he found a
crowd of officers talking together earnestly and directing their glasses
towards her disc. Even here, out on the ocean, the Queen of the night,
was as great an object of attraction as on the North American Continent
generally, where, that very night and that very hour, at least 40
million pairs of eyes were anxiously gazing at her. Apparently forgetful
that even the very best of their glasses could no more see the
Projectile than angulate Sirius, the officers held them fast to their
eyes for five minutes at a time, and then took them away only to talk
with remarkable fluency on what they had not discovered.

"Any sign of them yet, gentlemen?" asked Brownson gaily as he joined the
group. "It's now pretty near time for them to put in an appearance.
They're gone ten days I should think."

"They're there, Lieutenant! not a doubt of it!" cried a young midshipman,
fresh from Annapolis, and of course "throughly posted" in the latest
revelations of Astronomy. "I feel as certain of their being there as I
am of our being here on the forecastle of the _Susquehanna_!"

"I must agree with you of course, Mr. Midshipman," replied Brownson
with a slight smile; "I have no grounds whatever for contradicting you."

"Neither have I," observed another officer, the surgeon of the vessel.
"The Projectile was to have reached the Moon when at her full, which was
at midnight on the 5th. To-day was the 11th. This gives them six days of
clear light--time enough in all conscience not only to land safely but
to install themselves quite comfortably in their new home. In fact, I
see them there already--"

"In my mind's eye, Horatio!" laughed one of the group. "Though the Doc
wears glasses, he can see more than any ten men on board."

--"Already"--pursued the Doctor, heedless of the interruption. "_Scene_,
a stony valley near a Selenite stream; the Projectile on the right, half
buried in volcanic _scoriae_, but apparently not much the worse for the
wear; ring mountains, craters, sharp peaks, etc. all around; old MAC
discovered taking observations with his levelling staff; BARBICAN
perched on the summit of a sharp pointed rock, writing up his note-book;
ARDAN, eye-glass on nose, hat under arm, legs apart, puffing at his
_Imperador_, like a--"

[Illustration: MAC DISCOVERED TAKING OBSERVATIONS.]

--"A locomotive!" interrupted the young Midshipman, his excitable
imagination so far getting the better of him as to make him forget his
manners. He had just finished Locke's famous MOON HOAX, and his brain
was still full of its pictures. "In the background," he went on, "can be
seen thousands of _Vespertiliones-Homines_ or _Man-Bats_, in all the
various attitudes of curiosity, alarm, or consternation; some of them
peeping around the rocks, some fluttering from peak to peak, all
gibbering a language more or less resembling the notes of birds. _Enter_
LUNATICO, King of the Selenites--"

"Excuse us, Mr. Midshipman," interrupted Brownson with an easy smile,
"Locke's authority may have great weight among the young Middies at
Annapolis, but it does not rank very high at present in the estimation
of practical scientists." This rebuff administered to the conceited
little Midshipman, a rebuff which the Doctor particularly relished,
Brownson continued: "Gentlemen, we certainly know nothing whatever
regarding our friends' fate; guessing gives no information. How we ever
are to hear from the Moon until we are connected with it by a lunar
cable, I can't even imagine. The probability is that we shall never--"

"Excuse me, Lieutenant," interrupted the unrebuffed little Midshipman;
"Can't Barbican write?"

A shout of derisive comments greeted this question.

"Certainly he can write, and send his letter by the Pony Express!" cried
one.

"A Postal Card would be cheaper!" cried another.

"The _New York Herald_ will send a reporter after it!" was the
exclamation of a third.

"Keep cool, just keep cool, gentlemen," persisted the little Midshipman,
not in the least abashed by the uproarious hilarity excited by his
remarks. "I asked if Barbican couldn't write. In that question I see
nothing whatever to laugh at. Can't a man write without being obliged to
send his letters?"

"This is all nonsense," said the Doctor. "What's the use of a man
writing to you if he can't send you what he writes?"

"What's the use of his sending it to you if he can have it read without
that trouble?" answered the little Midshipman in a confident tone. "Is
there not a telescope at Long's Peak? Doesn't it bring the Moon within a
few miles of the Rocky Mountains, and enable us to see on her surface,
objects as small as nine feet in diameter? Well! What's to prevent
Barbican and his friends from constructing a gigantic alphabet? If they
write words of even a few hundred yards and sentences a mile or two
long, what is to prevent us from reading them? Catch the idea now, eh?"

They did catch the idea, and heartily applauded the little Middy for his
smartness. Even the Doctor saw a certain kind of merit in it, and
Brownson acknowledged it to be quite feasible. In fact, expanding on it,
the Lieutenant assured his hearers that, by means of large parabolic
reflectors, luminous groups of rays could be dispatched from the Earth,
of sufficient brightness to establish direct communication even with
Venus or Mars, where these rays would be quite as visible as the planet
Neptune is from the Earth. He even added that those brilliant points of
light, which have been quite frequently observed in Mars and Venus, are
perhaps signals made to the Earth by the inhabitants of these planets.
He concluded, however, by observing that, though we might by these means
succeed in obtaining news from the Moon, we could not possibly send any
intelligence back in return, unless indeed the Selenites had at their
disposal optical instruments at least as good as ours.

All agreed that this was very true, and, as is generally the case when
one keeps all the talk to himself, the conversation now assumed so
serious a turn that for some time it was hardly worth recording.

At last the Chief Engineer, excited by some remark that had been made,
observed with much earnestness:

"You may say what you please, gentlemen, but I would willingly give my
last dollar to know what has become of those brave men! Have they done
anything? Have they seen anything? I hope they have. But I should dearly
like to know. Ever so little success would warrant a repetition of the
great experiment. The Columbiad is still to the good in Florida, as it
will be for many a long day. There are millions of men to day as curious
as I am upon the subject. Therefore it will be only a question of mere
powder and bullets if a cargo of visitors is not sent to the Moon every
time she passes our zenith.

"Marston would be one of the first of them," observed Brownson, lighting
his cigar.

"Oh, he would have plenty of company!" cried the Midshipman. "I should
be delighted to go if he'd only take me."

"No doubt you would, Mr. Midshipman," said Brownson, "the wise men, you
know, are not all dead yet."

"Nor the fools either, Lieutenant," growled old Frisby, the fourth
officer, getting tired of the conversation.

"There is no question at all about it," observed another; "every time a
Projectile started, it would take off as many as it could carry."

"I wish it would only start often enough to improve the breed!" growled
old Frisby.

"I have no doubt whatever," added the Chief Engineer, "that the thing
would get so fashionable at last that half the inhabitants of the Earth
would take a trip to the Moon."

"I should limit that privilege strictly to some of our friends in
Washington," said old Frisby, whose temper had been soured probably by a
neglect to recognize his long services; "and most of them I should by
all means insist on sending to the Moon. Every month I would ram a whole
raft of them into the Columbiad, with a charge under them strong enough
to blow them all to the--But--Hey!--what in creation's that?"

[Illustration: FOR A SECOND ONLY DID THEY CATCH ITS FLASH.]

Whilst the officer was speaking, his companions had suddenly caught a
sound in the air which reminded them immediately of the whistling scream
of a Lancaster shell. At first they thought the steam was escaping
somewhere, but, looking upwards, they saw that the strange noise
proceeded from a ball of dazzling brightness, directly over their heads,
and evidently falling towards them with tremendous velocity. Too
frightened to say a word, they could only see that in its light the
whole ship blazed like fireworks, and the whole sea glittered like a
silver lake. Quicker than tongue can utter, or mind can conceive, it
flashed before their eyes for a second, an enormous bolide set on fire
by friction with the atmosphere, and gleaming in its white heat like a
stream of molten iron gushing straight from the furnace. For a second
only did they catch its flash before their eyes; then striking the
bowsprit of the vessel, which it shivered into a thousand pieces, it
vanished in the sea in an instant with a hiss, a scream, and a roar, all
equally indescribable. For some time the utmost confusion reigned on
deck. With eyes too dazzled to see, ears still ringing with the
frightful combination of unearthly sounds, faces splashed with floods of
sea water, and noses stifled with clouds of scalding steam, the crew of
the _Susquehanna_ could hardly realize that their marvellous escape by a
few feet from instant and certain destruction was an accomplished fact,
not a frightful dream. They were still engaged in trying to open their
eyes and to get the hot water out of their ears, when they suddenly
heard the trumpet voice of Captain Bloomsbury crying, as he stood half
dressed on the head of the cabin stairs:

"What's up, gentlemen? In heaven's name, what's up?"

The little Midshipman had been knocked flat by the concussion and
stunned by the uproar. But before any body else could reply, his voice
was heard, clear and sharp, piercing the din like an arrow:

"It's THEY, Captain! Didn't I tell you so?"




CHAPTER XXI.

NEWS FOR MARSTON!


In a few minutes, consciousness had restored order on board the
_Susquehanna_, but the excitement was as great as ever. They had escaped
by a hairsbreadth the terrible fate of being both burned and drowned
without a moment's warning, without a single soul being left alive to
tell the fatal tale; but on this neither officer nor man appeared to
bestow the slightest thought. They were wholly engrossed with the
terrible catastrophe that had befallen the famous adventurers. What was
the loss of the _Susquehanna_ and all it contained, in comparison to the
loss experienced by the world at large in the terrible tragic
_dénouement_ just witnessed? The worst had now come to the worst. At
last the long agony was over forever. Those three gallant men, who had
not only conceived but had actually executed the grandest and most
daring enterprise of ancient or modern times, had paid by the most
fearful of deaths, for their sublime devotion to science and their
unselfish desire to extend the bounds of human knowledge! Before such a
reflection as this, all other considerations were at once reduced to
proportions of the most absolute insignificance.

But was the death of the adventurers so very certain after all? Hope is
hard to kill. Consciousness had brought reflection, reflection doubt,
and doubt had resuscitated hope.

"It's they!" had exclaimed the little Midshipman, and the cry had
thrilled every heart on board as with an electric shock. Everybody had
instantly understood it. Everybody had felt it to be true. Nothing could
be more certain than that the meteor which had just flashed before their
eyes was the famous projectile of the Baltimore Gun Club. Nothing could
be truer than that it contained the three world renowned men and that it
now lay in the black depths of the Pacific Ocean.

But here opinions began to diverge. Some courageous breasts soon refused
to accept the prevalent idea.

"They're killed by the shock!" cried the crowd.

"Killed?" exclaimed the hopeful ones; "Not a bit of it! The water here
is deep enough to break a fall twice as great."

"They're smothered for want of air!" exclaimed the crowd.

"Their stock may not be run out yet!" was the ready reply. "Their air
apparatus is still on hand."

"They're burned to a cinder!" shrieked the crowd.

"They had not time to be burned!" answered the Band of Hope. "The
Projectile did not get hot till it reached the atmosphere, through which
it tore in a few seconds."

"If they're neither burned nor smothered nor killed by the shock,
they're sure to be drowned!" persisted the crowd, with redoubled
lamentations.

"Fish 'em up first!" cried the Hopeful Band. "Come! Let's lose no time!
Let's fish 'em up at once!"

The cries of Hope prevailed. The unanimous opinion of a council of the
officers hastily summoned together by the Captain was to go to work and
fish up the Projectile with the least possible delay. But was such an
operation possible? asked a doubter. Yes! was the overwhelming reply;
difficult, no doubt, but still quite possible. Certainly, however, such
an attempt was not immediately possible as the _Susquehanna_ had no
machinery strong enough or suitable enough for a piece of work involving
such a nicety of detailed operations, not to speak of its exceeding
difficulty. The next unanimous decision, therefore, was to start the
vessel at once for the nearest port, whence they could instantly
telegraph the Projectile's arrival to the Baltimore Gun Club.

But what _was_ the nearest port? A serious question, to answer which in
a satisfactory manner the Captain had to carefully examine his sailing
charts. The neighboring shores of the California Peninsula, low and
sandy, were absolutely destitute of good harbors. San Diego, about a
day's sail directly north, possessed an excellent harbor, but, not yet
having telegraphic communication with the rest of the Union, it was of
course not to be thought of. San Pedro Bay was too open to be approached
in winter. The Santa Barbara Channel was liable to the same objection,
not to mention the trouble often caused by kelp and wintry fogs. The bay
of San Luis Obispo was still worse in every respect; having no islands
to act as a breakwater, landing there in winter was often impossible.
The harbor of the picturesque old town of Monterey was safe enough, but
some uncertainty regarding sure telegraphic communications with San
Francisco, decided the council not to venture it. Half Moon Bay, a
little to the north, would be just as risky, and in moments like the
present when every minute was worth a day, no risk involving the
slightest loss of time could be ventured.

Evidently, therefore, the most advisable plan was to sail directly for
the bay of San Francisco, the Golden Gate, the finest harbor on the
Pacific Coast and one of the safest in the world. Here telegraphic
communication with all parts of the Union was assured beyond a doubt.
San Francisco, about 750 miles distant, the _Susquehanna_ could probably
make in three days; with a little increased pressure, possibly in two
days and a-half. The sooner then she started, the better.

The fires were soon in full blast. The vessel could get under weigh at
once. In fact, nothing delayed immediate departure but the consideration
that two miles of sounding line were still to be hauled up from the
ocean depths. Rut the Captain, after a moment's thought, unwilling that
any more time should be lost, determined to cut it. Then marking its
position by fastening its end to a buoy, he could haul it up at his
leisure on his return.

"Besides," said he, "the buoy will show us the precise spot where the
Projectile fell."

"As for that, Captain," observed Brownson, "the exact spot has been
carefully recorded already: 27° 7' north latitude by 41° 37' west
longitude, reckoning from the meridian of Washington."

"All right, Lieutenant," said the Captain curtly. "Cut the line!"

A large cone-shaped metal buoy, strengthened still further by a couple
of stout spars to which it was securely lashed, was soon rigged up on
deck, whence, being hoisted overboard, the whole apparatus was carefully
lowered to the surface of the sea. By means of a ring in the small end
of the buoy, the latter was then solidly attached to the part of the
sounding line that still remained in the water, and all possible
precautions were taken to diminish the danger of friction, caused by the
contrary currents, tidal waves, and the ordinary heaving swells of
ocean.

It was now a little after three o'clock in the morning. The Chief
Engineer announced everything to be in perfect readiness for starting.
The Captain gave the signal, directing the pilot to steer straight for
San Francisco, north-north by west. The waters under the stern began to
boil and foam; the ship very soon felt and yielded to the power that
animated her; and in a few minutes she was making at least twelve knots
an hour. Her sailing powers were somewhat higher than this, but it was
necessary to be careful in the neighborhood of such a dangerous coast as
that of California.

Seven hundred and fifty miles of smooth waters presented no very
difficult task to a fast traveller like the _Susquehanna_, yet it was
not till two days and a-half afterwards that she sighted the Golden
Gate. As usual, the coast was foggy; neither Point Lobos nor Point
Boneta could be seen. But Captain Bloomsbury, well acquainted with every
portion of this coast, ran as close along the southern shore as he
dared, the fog-gun at Point Boneta safely directing his course. Here
expecting to be able to gain a few hours time by signalling to the outer
telegraph station on Point Lobos, he had caused to be painted on a sail
in large black letters: "THE MOONMEN ARE BACK!" but the officers in
attendance, though their fog-horn could be easily heard--the distance
not being quite two miles--were unfortunately not able to see it.
Perhaps they did see it, but feared a hoax.

Giving the Fort Point a good wide berth, the _Susquehanna_ found the fog
gradually clearing away, and by half-past three the passengers, looking
under it, enjoyed the glorious view of the Contra Costa mountains east
of San Francisco, which had obtained for this entrance the famous and
well deserved appellation of the Golden Gate. In another half hour, they
had doubled Black Point, and were lying safely at anchor between the
islands of Alcatraz and Yerba Buena. In less than five minutes
afterwards the Captain was quickly lowered into his gig, and eight stout
pairs of arms were pulling him rapidly to shore.

The usual crowd of idlers had collected that evening on the summit of
Telegraph Hill to enjoy the magnificent view, which for variety, extent,
beauty and grandeur, is probably unsurpassed on earth. Of course, the
inevitable reporter, hot after an item, was not absent. The
_Susquehanna_ had hardly crossed the bar, when they caught sight of her.
A government vessel entering the bay at full speed, is something to look
at even in San Francisco. Even during the war, it would be considered
rather unusual. But they soon remarked that her bowsprit was completely
broken off. _Very_ unusual. Something decidedly is the matter. See! The
vessel is hardly anchored when the Captain leaves her and makes for
Megg's Wharf at North Point as hard as ever his men can pull! Something
_must_ be the matter--and down the steep hill they all rush as fast as
ever their legs can carry them to the landing at Megg's Wharf.

The Captain could hardly force his way through the dense throng, but he
made no attempt whatever to gratify their ill dissembled curiosity.

"Carriage!" he cried, in a voice seldom heard outside the din of battle.

In a moment seventeen able-bodied cabmen were trying to tear him limb
from limb.

"To the telegraph office! Like lightning!" were his stifled mutterings,
as he struggled in the arms of the Irish giant who had at last
succeeded in securing him.

"To the telegraph office!" cried most of the crowd, running after him
like fox hounds, but the more knowing ones immediately began questioning
the boatmen in the Captain's gig. These honest fellows, nothing loth to
tell all that they knew and more that they invented, soon had the
satisfaction of finding themselves the centrepoint of a wonder stricken
audience, greedily swallowing up every item of the extraordinary news
and still hungrily gaping for more.

By this time, however, an important dispatch was flying east, bearing
four different addresses: To the Secretary of the U.S. Navy, Washington;
To Colonel Joseph Wilcox, Vice-President _pro tem._, Baltimore Gun Club,
Md; To J.T. Marston, Esq. Long's Peak, Grand County, Colorado; and To
Professor Wenlock, Sub-Director of the Cambridge Observatory, Mass.

This dispatch read as follows:

     "In latitude twenty-seven degrees seven minutes north and longitude
     forty-one degrees thirty-seven minutes west shortly after one
     o'clock on the morning of twelfth instant Columbiad Projectile fell
     in Pacific--send instructions--

     BLOOMSBURY,

     _Captain_, SUSQUEHANNA."

In five minutes more all San Francisco had the news. An hour later, the
newspaper boys were shrieking it through the great cities of the
States. Before bed-time every man, woman, and child in the country had
heard it and gone into ecstasies over it. Owing to the difference in
longitude, the people of Europe could not hear it till after midnight.
But next morning the astounding issue of the great American enterprise
fell on them like a thunder clap.

We must, of course, decline all attempts at describing the effects of
this most unexpected intelligence on the world at large.

The Secretary of the Navy immediately telegraphed directions to the
_Susquehanna_ to keep a full head of steam up night and day so as to be
ready to give instant execution to orders received at any moment.

The Observatory authorities at Cambridge held a special meeting that
very evening, where, with all the serene calmness so characteristic of
learned societies, they discussed the scientific points of the question
in all its bearings. But, before committing themselves to any decided
opinion, they unanimously resolved to wait for the development of
further details.

At the rooms of the Gun Club in Baltimore there was a terrible time. The
kind reader no doubt remembers the nature of the dispatch sent one day
previously by Professor Belfast from the Long's Peak observatory,
announcing that the Projectile had been seen but that it had become the
Moon's satellite, destined to revolve around her forever and ever till
time should be no more. The reader is also kindly aware by this time
that such dispatch was not supported by the slightest foundations in
fact. The learned Professor, in a moment of temporary cerebral
excitation, to which even the greatest scientist is just as liable as
the rest of us, had taken some little meteor or, still more probably,
some little fly-speck in the telescope for the Projectile. The worst of
it was that he had not only boldly proclaimed his alleged discovery to
the world at large but he had even explained all about it with the well
known easy pomposity that "Science" sometimes ventures to assume. The
consequences of all this may be readily guessed. The Baltimore Gun Club
had split up immediately into two violently opposed parties. Those
gentlemen who regularly conned the scientific magazines, took every word
of the learned Professor's dispatch for gospel--or rather for something
of far higher value, and more strictly in accordance with the highly
advanced scientific developments of the day. But the others, who never
read anything but the daily papers and who could not bear the idea of
losing Barbican, laughed the whole thing to scorn. Belfast, they said,
had seen as much of the Projectile as he had of the "Open Polar Sea,"
and the rest of the dispatch was mere twaddle, though asserted with all
the sternness of a religious dogma and enveloped in the usual scientific
slang.

The meeting held in the Club House, 24 Monument Square, Baltimore, on
the evening of the 13th, had been therefore disorderly in the highest
degree. Long before the appointed hour, the great hall was densely
packed and the greatest uproar prevailed. Vice-President Wilcox took the
chair, and all was comparatively quiet until Colonel Bloomsbury, the
Honorary Secretary in Marston's absence, commenced to read Belfast's
dispatch. Then the scene, according to the account given in the next
day's _Sun_, from whose columns we condense our report, actually
"beggared description." Roars, yells, cheers, counter-cheers, clappings,
hissings, stampings, squallings, whistlings, barkings, mewings, cock
crowings, all of the most fearful and demoniacal character, turned the
immense hall into a regular pandemonium. In vain did President Wilcox
fire off his detonating bell, with a report on ordinary occasions as
loud as the roar of a small piece of ordnance. In the dreadful noise
then prevailing it was no more heard than the fizz of a lucifer match.

Some cries, however, made themselves occasionally heard in the pauses of
the din. "Read! Read!" "Dry up!" "Sit down!" "Give him an egg!" "Fair
play!" "Hurrah for Barbican!" "Down with his enemies!" "Free Speech!"
"Belfast won't bite you!" "He'd like to bite Barbican, but his teeth
aren't sharp enough!" "Barbican's a martyr to science, let's hear his
fate!" "Martyr be hanged; the Old Man is to the good yet!" "Belfast is
the grandest name in Science!" "Groans for the grandest name!" (Awful
groans.) "Three cheers for Old Man Barbican!" (The exceptional strength
alone of the walls saved the building, from being blown out by an
explosion in which at least 5,000 pairs of lungs participated.)

"Three cheers for M'Nicholl and the Frenchman!" This was followed by
another burst of cheering so hearty, vigorous and long continued that
the scientific party, or _Belfasters_ as they were now called, seeing
that further prolongation of the meet was perfectly useless, moved to
adjourn. It was carried unanimously. President Wilcox left the chair,
the meeting broke up in the wildest disorder--the scientists rather
crest fallen, but the Barbican men quite jubilant for having been so
successful in preventing the reading of that detested dispatch.

Little sleeping was done that night in Baltimore, and less business next
day. Even in the public schools so little work was done by the children
that S.T. Wallace, Esq., President of the Education Board, advised an
anticipation of the usual Christmas recess by a week. Every one talked
of the Projectile; nothing was heard at the corners but discussions
regarding its probable fate. All Baltimore was immediately rent into two
parties, the _Belfasters_ and the _Barbicanites_. The latter was the
most enthusiastic and noisy, the former decidedly the most numerous and
influential.

Science, or rather pseudo-science, always exerts a mysterious attraction
of an exceedingly powerful nature over the generality--that is, the more
ignorant portion of the human race. Assert the most absurd nonsense,
call it a scientific truth, and back it up with strange words which,
like _potentiality_, etc., sound as if they had a meaning but in
reality have none, and nine out of every ten men who read your book will
believe you. Acquire a remarkable name in one branch of human knowledge,
and presto! you are infallible in all. Who can contradict you, if you
only wrap up your assertions in specious phrases that not one man in a
million attempts to ascertain the real meaning of? We like so much to be
saved the trouble of thinking, that it is far easier and more
comfortable to be led than to contradict, to fall in quietly with the
great flock of sheep that jump blindly after their leader than to remain
apart, making one's self ridiculous by foolishly attempting to argue.
Real argument, in fact, is very difficult, for several reasons: first,
you must understand your subject _well_, which is hardly likely;
secondly, your opponent must also understand it well, which is even less
likely; thirdly, you must listen patiently to his arguments, which is
still less likely; and fourthly, he must listen to yours, the least
likely of all. If a quack advertises a panacea for all human ills at a
dollar a bottle, a hundred will buy the bottle, for one that will try
how many are killed by it. What would the investigator gain by charging
the quack with murder? Nobody would believe him, because nobody would
take the trouble to follow his arguments. His adversary, first in the
field, had gained the popular ear, and remained the unassailable master
of the situation. Our love of "Science" rests upon our admiration of
intellect, only unfortunately the intellect is too often that of other
people, not our own.

The very sound of Belfast's phrases, for instance, "satellite," "lunar
attraction," "immutable path of its orbit," etc, convinced the greater
part of the "intelligent" community that he who used them so flippantly
must be an exceedingly great man. Therefore, he had completely proved
his case. Therefore, the great majority of the ladies and gentlemen that
regularly attend the scientific lectures of the Peabody Institute,
pronounced Barbican's fate and that of his companions to be sealed. Next
morning's newspapers contained lengthy obituary notices of the Great
Balloon-attics as the witty man of the _New York Herald_ phrased it,
some of which might be considered quite complimentary. These, all
industriously copied into the evening papers, the people were carefully
reading over again, some with honest regret, some deriving a great moral
lesson from an attempt exceedingly reprehensible in every point of view,
but most, we are sorry to acknowledge, with a feeling of ill concealed
pleasure. Had not they always said how it was to end? Was there anything
more absurd ever conceived? Scientific men too! Hang such science! If
you want a real scientific man, no wind bag, no sham, take Belfast! _He_
knows what he's talking about! No taking _him_ in! Didn't he by means of
the Monster Telescope, see the Projectile, as large as life, whirling
round and round the Moon? Anyway, what else could have happened? Wasn't
it what anybody's common sense expected? Don't you remember a
conversation we had with you one day? etc., etc.

The _Barbicanites_ were very doleful, but they never though of giving
in. They would die sooner. When pressed for a scientific reply to a
scientific argument, they denied that there was any argument to reply
to. What! Had not Belfast seen the Projectile? No! Was not the Great
Telescope then good for anything? Yes, but not for everything! Did not
Belfast know his business? No! Did they mean to say that he had seen
nothing at all? Well, not exactly that, but those scientific gentlemen
can seldom be trusted; in their rage for discovery, they make a mountain
out of a molehill, or, what is worse, they start a theory and then
distort facts to support it. Answers of this kind either led directly to
a fight, or the _Belfasters_ moved away thoroughly disgusted with the
ignorance of their opponents, who could not see a chain of reasoning as
bright as the noonday sun.

Things were in this feverish state on the evening of the 14th, when, all
at once, Bloomsbury's dispatch arrived in Baltimore. I need not say that
it dropped like a spark in a keg of gun powder. The first question all
asked was: Is it genuine or bogus? real or got up by the stockbrokers?
But a few flashes backwards and forwards over the wires soon settled
that point. The stunning effects of the new blow were hardly over when
the _Barbicanites_ began to perceive that the wonderful intelligence was
decidedly in their favor. Was it not a distinct contradiction of the
whole story told by their opponents? If Barbican and his friends were
lying at the bottom of the Pacific, they were certainly not
circumgyrating around the Moon. If it was the Projectile that had broken
off the bowsprit of the _Susquehanna_, it could not certainly be the
Projectile that Belfast had seen only the day previous doing the duty
of a satellite. Did not the truth of one incident render the other an
absolute impossibility? If Bloomsbury was right, was not Belfast an ass?
Hurrah!

The new revelation did not improve poor Barbican's fate a bit--no matter
for that! Did not the _party_ gain by it? What would the _Belfasters_
say now? Would not they hold down their heads in confusion and disgrace?

The _Belfasters_, with a versatility highly creditable to human nature,
did nothing of the kind. Rapidly adopting the very line of tactics they
had just been so severely censuring, they simply denied the whole thing.
What! the truth of the Bloomsbury dispatch? Yes, every word of it! Had
not Bloomsbury seen the Projectile? No! Were not his eyes good for
anything? Yes, but not for everything! Did not the Captain know his
business? No! Did they mean to say that the bowsprit of the
_Susquehanna_ had not been broken off? Well, not exactly that, but those
naval gentlemen are not always to be trusted; after a pleasant little
supper, they often see the wrong light-house, or, what is worse, in
their desire to shield their negligence from censure, they dodge the
blame by trying to show that the accident was unavoidable. The
_Susquehanna's_ bowsprit had been snapped off, in all probability, by
some sudden squall, or, what was still more likely, some little aerolite
had struck it and frightened the crew into fits. When answers of this
kind did not lead to blows, the case was an exceptional one indeed. The
contestants were so numerous and so excited that the police at last
began to think of letting them fight it out without any interference.
Marshal O'Kane, though ably assisted by his 12 officers and 500
patrolmen, had a terrible time of it. The most respectable men in
Baltimore, with eyes blackened, noses bleeding, and collars torn, saw
the inside of a prison that night for the first time in all their lives.
Men that even the Great War had left the warmest of friends, now abused
each other like fishwomen. The prison could not hold the half of those
arrested. They were all, however, discharged next morning, for the
simple reason that the Mayor and the aldermen had been themselves
engaged in so many pugilistic combats during the night that they were
altogether disabled from attending to their magisterial duties next day.

Our readers, however, may be quite assured that, even in the wildest
whirl of the tremendous excitement around them, all the members of the
Baltimore Gun Club did not lose their heads. In spite of the determined
opposition of the _Belfasters_ who would not allow the Bloomsbury
dispatch to be read at the special meeting called that evening, a few
succeeded in adjourning to a committee-room, where Joseph Wilcox, Esq.,
presiding, our old friends Colonel Bloomsbury, Major Elphinstone, Tom
Hunter, Billsby the brave, General Morgan, Chief Engineer John Murphy,
and about as many more as were sufficient to form a quorum, declared
themselves to be in regular session, and proceeded quietly to debate on
the nature of Captain Bloomsbury's dispatch.

Was it of a nature to justify immediate action or not? Decided
unanimously in the affirmative. Why so? Because, whether actually true
or untrue, the incident it announced was not impossible. Had it indeed
announced the Projectile to have fallen in California or in South
America, there would have been good valid reasons to question its
accuracy. But by taking into consideration the Moon's distance, and the
time elapsed between the moment of the start and that of the presumed
fall (about 10 days), and also the Earth's revolution in the meantime,
it was soon calculated that the point at which the Projectile should
strike our globe, if it struck it at all, would be somewhere about 27°
north latitude, and 42° west longitude--the very identical spot given in
the Captain's dispatch! This certainly was a strong point in its favor,
especially as there was positively nothing valid whatever to urge
against it.

A decided resolution was therefore immediately taken. Everything that
man could do was to be done at once, in order to fish up their brave
associates from the depths of the Pacific. That very night, in fact,
whilst the streets of Baltimore were still resounding with the yells of
contending _Belfasters_ and _Barbicanites_, a committee of four, Morgan,
Hunter, Murphy, and Elphinstone, were speeding over the Alleghanies in a
special train, placed at their disposal by the _Baltimore and Ohio
Railroad Company_, and fast enough to land them in Chicago pretty early
on the following evening.

Here a fresh locomotive and a Pullman car taking charge of them, they
were whirled off to Omaha, reaching that busy locality at about supper
time on the evening of December 16th. The Pacific Train, as it was
called though at that time running no further west than Julesburg,
instead of waiting for the regular hour of starting, fired up that very
night, and was soon pulling the famous Baltimore Club men up the slopes
of the Nebraska at the rate of forty miles an hour. They were awakened
before light next morning by the guard, who told them that Julesburg,
which they were just entering, was the last point so far reached by the
rails. But their regret at this circumstance was most unexpectedly and
joyfully interrupted by finding their hands warmly clasped and their
names cheerily cried out by their old and beloved friend, J.T. Marston,
the illustrious Secretary of the Baltimore Gun Club.

At the close of the first volume of our entertaining and veracious
history, we left this most devoted friend and admirer of Barbican
established firmly at his post on the summit of Long's Peak, beside the
Great Telescope, watching the skies, night and day, for some traces of
his departed friends. There, as the gracious Reader will also remember,
he had come a little too late to catch that sight of the Projectile
which Belfast had at first reported so confidently, but of which the
Professor by degrees had begun to entertain the most serious doubts.

In these doubts, however, Marston, strange to say, would not permit
himself for one moment to share. Belfast might shake his head as much as
he pleased; he, Marston, was no fickle reed to be shaken by every wind;
he firmly believed the Projectile to be there before him, actually in
sight, if he could only see it. All the long night of the 13th, and even
for several hours of the 14th, he never quitted the telescope for a
single instant. The midnight sky was in magnificent order; not a speck
dimmed its azure of an intensely dark tint. The stars blazed out like
fires; the Moon refused none of her secrets to the scientists who were
gazing at her so intently that night from the platform on the summit of
Long's Peak. But no black spot crawling over her resplendent surface
rewarded their eager gaze. Marston indeed would occasionally utter a
joyful cry announcing some discovery, but in a moment after he was
confessing with groans that it was all a false alarm. Towards morning,
Belfast gave up in despair and went to take a sleep; but no sleep for
Marston. Though he was now quite alone, the assistants having also
retired, he kept on talking incessantly to himself, expressing the most
unbounded confidence in the safety of his friends, and the absolute
certainty of their return. It was not until some hours after the Sun
had risen and the Moon had disappeared behind the snowy peaks of the
west, that he at last withdrew his weary eye from the glass through
which every image formed by the great reflector was to be viewed. The
countenance he turned on Belfast, who had now come back, was rueful in
the extreme. It was the image of grief and despair.

"Did you see nothing whatever during the night, Professor?" he asked of
Belfast, though he knew very well the answer he was to get.

"Nothing whatever."

"But you saw them once, didn't you?"

"Them! Who?"

"Our friends."

"Oh! the Projectile--well--I think I must have made some oversight."

"Don't say that! Did not Mr. M'Connell see it also?"

"No. He only wrote out what I dictated."

"Why, you must have seen it! I have seen it myself!"

"You shall never see it again! It's shot off into space."

"You're as wrong now as you thought you were right yesterday."

"I'm sorry to say I was wrong yesterday; but I have every reason to
believe I'm right to-day."

"We shall see! Wait till to-night!"

"To-night! Too late! As far as the Projectile is concerned, night is now
no better than day."

The learned Professor was quite right, but in a way which he did not
exactly expect. That very evening, after a weary day, apparently a month
long, during which Marston sought in vain for a few hours' repose, just
as all hands, well wrapped up in warm furs, were getting ready to assume
their posts once more near the mouth of the gigantic Telescope, Mr.
M'Connell hastily presented himself with a dispatch for Belfast.

The Professor was listlessly breaking the envelope, when he uttered a
sharp cry of surprise.

"Hey!" cried Marston quickly. "What's up now?"

"Oh!! The Pro--pro--projectile!!"

"What of it? What? Oh what?? Speak!!"

"IT'S BACK!!"

Marston uttered a wild yell of mingled horror, surprise, and joy, jumped
a little into the air, and then fell flat and motionless on the
platform. Had Belfast shot him with a ten pound weight, right between
the two eyes, he could not have knocked him flatter or stiffer. Having
neither slept all night, nor eaten all day, the poor fellow's system had
become so weak that such unexpected news was really more than he could
bear. Besides, as one of the Cambridge men of the party, a young medical
student, remarked: the thin, cold air of these high mountains was
extremely enervating.

The astronomers, all exceedingly alarmed, did what they could to recover
their friend from his fit, but it was nearly ten minutes before they had
the satisfaction of seeing his limbs moving with a slight quiver and
his breast beginning to heave. At last the color came back to his face
and his eyes opened. He stared around for a few seconds at his friends,
evidently unconscious, but his senses were not long in returning.

"Say!" he uttered at last in a faint voice.

"Well!" replied Belfast.

"Where is that infernal Pro--pro--jectile?"

"In the Pacific Ocean."

"What??"

He was on his feet in an instant.

"Say that again!"

"In the Pacific Ocean."

"Hurrah! All right! Old Barbican's not made into mincemeat yet! No,
sirree! Let's start!"

"Where for?"

"San Francisco!"

"When?"

"This instant!"

"In the dark?"

"We shall soon have the light of the Moon! Curse her! it's the least she
can do after all the trouble she has given us!"




CHAPTER XXII.

ON THE WINGS OF THE WIND.


Leaving M'Connell and a few other Cambridge men to take charge of the
Great Telescope, Marston and Belfast in little more than an hour after
the receipt of the exciting dispatch, were scudding down the slopes of
Long's Peak by the only possible route--the inclined railroad. This
mode of travelling, however, highly satisfactory as far as it went,
ceased altogether at the mountain foot, at the point where the Dale
River formed a junction with Cache la Poudre Creek. But Marston, having
already mapped out the whole journey with some care and forethought, was
ready for almost every emergency. Instinctively feeling that the first
act of the Baltimore Gun Club would be to send a Committee to San
Francisco to investigate matters, he had determined to meet this
deputation on the route, and his only trouble now was to determine at
what point he would be most likely to catch them. His great start, he
knew perfectly well, could not put him more than a day in advance of
them: they having the advantage of a railroad nearly all the way, whilst
himself and Belfast could not help losing much time in struggling
through ravines, canyons, mountain precipices, and densely tangled
forests, not to mention the possibility of a brush or two with prowling
Indians, before they could strike the line of the Pacific Railroad,
along which he knew the Club men to be approaching. After a few hours
rest at La Porte, a little settlement lately started in the valley,
early in the morning they took the stage that passed through from Denver
to Cheyenne, a town at that time hardly a year old but already
flourishing, with a busy population of several thousand inhabitants.

Losing not a moment at Cheyenne, where they arrived much sooner than
they had anticipated, they took places in Wells, Fargo and Co.'s
_Overland Stage Mail_ bound east, and were soon flying towards Julesburg
at the rate of twelve miles an hour. Here Marston was anxious to meet
the Club men, as at this point the Pacific Railroad divided into two
branches--one bearing north, the other south of the Great Salt Lake
--and he feared they might take the wrong one.

But he arrived in Julesburg fully 10 hours before the Committee, so that
himself and Belfast had not only ample time to rest a little after their
rapid flight from Long's Peak, but also to make every possible
preparation for the terrible journey of more than fifteen hundred miles
that still lay before them.

This journey, undertaken at a most unseasonable period of the year, and
over one of the most terrible deserts in the world, would require a
volume for itself. Constantly presenting the sharpest points of contrast
between the most savage features of wild barbaric nature on the one
hand, and the most touching traits of the sweetest humanity on the
other, the story of our Club men's adventures, if only well told, could
hardly fail to be highly interesting. But instead of a volume, we can
give it only a chapter, and that a short one.

From Julesburg, the last station on the eastern end of the Pacific
Railroad, to Cisco, the last station on its western end, the distance is
probably about fifteen hundred miles, about as far as Constantinople is
from London, or Moscow from Paris. This enormous stretch of country had
to be travelled all the way by, at the best, a six horse stage tearing
along night and day at a uniform rate, road or no road, of ten miles an
hour. But this was the least of the trouble. Bands of hostile Indians
were a constant source of watchfulness and trouble, against which even a
most liberal stock of rifles and revolvers were not always a
reassurance. Whirlwinds of dust often overwhelmed the travellers so
completely that they could hardly tell day from night, whilst blasts of
icy chill, sweeping down from the snowy peaks of the Rocky Mountains,
often made them imagine themselves in the midst of the horrors of an
Arctic winter.

The predominant scenery gave no pleasure to the eye or exhilaration to
the mind. It was of the dreariest description. Days and days passed with
hardly a house to be seen, or a tree or a blade of grass. I might even
add, or a mountain or a river, for the one was too often a heap of
agglomerated sand and clay cut into unsightly chasms by the rain, and
the other generally degenerated into a mere stagnant swamp, its
shallowness and dryness increasing regularly with its length. The only
houses were log ranches, called Relays, hardly visible in their sandy
surroundings, and separate from each other by a mean distance of ten
miles. The only trees were either stunted cedars, so far apart, as to be
often denominated Lone Trees; and, besides wormwood, the only plant was
the sage plant, about two feet high, gray, dry, crisp, and emitting a
sharp pungent odor by no means pleasant.

In fact, Barbican and his companions had seen nothing drearier or
savager in the dreariest and savagest of lunar landscapes than the
scenes occasionally presented to Marston and his friends in their
headlong journey on the track of the great Pacific Railroad. Here,
bowlders, high, square, straight and plumb as an immense hotel, blocked
up your way; there, lay an endless level, flat as the palm of your hand,
over which your eye might roam in vain in search of something green like
a meadow, yellow like a cornfield, or black like ploughed ground--a mere
boundless waste of dirty white from the stunted wormwood, often rendered
misty with the clouds of smarting alkali dust.

Occasionally, however, this savage scenery decidedly changed its
character. Now, a lovely glen would smile before our travellers,
traversed by tinkling streams, waving with sweet grasses, dotted with
little groves, alive with hares, antelopes, and even elks, but
apparently never yet trodden by the foot of man. Now, our Club men felt
like travelling on clouds, as they careered along the great plateau
west of the Black Hills, fully 8,000 feet above the level of the sea,
though even there the grass was as green and fresh as if it grew in some
sequestered valley of Pennsylvania. Again,

    "In this untravelled world whose margin fades
    For ever and for ever as they moved,"

they would find themselves in an immense, tawny, treeless plain,
outlined by mountains so distant as to resemble fantastic cloud piles.
Here for days they would have to skirt the coasts of a Lake, vast,
unruffled, unrippled, apparently of metallic consistency, from whose
sapphire depths rose pyramidal islands to a height of fully three
thousand feet above the surface.

In a few days all would change. No more sand wastes, salt water flats,
or clouds of blinding alkali dust. The travellers' road, at the foot of
black precipitous cliffs, would wind along the brink of a roaring
torrent, whose devious course would lead them into the heart of the
Sierras, where misty peaks solemnly sentinelled the nestling vales still
smiling in genial summer verdure. Across these they were often whirled
through immense forests of varied character, here dense enough to
obscure the track, there swaying in the sweet sunlight and vocal with
joyous birds of bright and gorgeous plumage. Then tropical vegetation
would completely hide the trail, crystal lakes would obstruct it,
cascades shooting down from perpendicular rocks would obliterate it,
mountain passes barricaded by basaltic columns would render it
uncertain, and on one occasion it was completely covered up by a fall of
snow to a depth of more than twenty feet.

But nothing could oppose serious delay to our travellers. Their motto
was ever "onward!" and what they lost in one hour by some mishap they
endeavored to recover on the next by redoubled speed. They felt that
they would be no friends of Barbican's if they were discouraged by
impossibilities. Besides, what would have been real impossibilities at
another time, several concurrent circumstances now rendered
comparatively easy.

The surveys, the gradings, the cuttings, and the other preliminary
labors in the great Pacific Railroad, gave them incalculable aid.
Horses, help, carriages, provisions were always in abundance. Their
object being well known, they had the best wishes of every hand on the
road. People remained up for them all hours of the night, no matter at
what station they were expected. The warmest and most comfortable of
meals were always ready for them, for which no charge would be taken on
any account. In Utah, a deputation of Mormons galloped alongside them
for forty miles to help them over some points of the road that had been
often found difficult. The season was the finest known for many years.
In short, as an old Californian said as he saw them shooting over the
rickety bridge that crossed the Bear River at Corinne: "they had
everything in their favor--_luck_ as well as _pluck_!"

The rate at which they performed this terrible ride across the
Continent and the progress they made each day, some readers may consider
worthy of a few more items for the sake of future reference. Discarding
the ordinary overland mail stage as altogether too slow for their
purpose, they hired at Julesburg a strong, well built carriage, large
enough to hold them all comfortably; but this they had to replace twice
before they came to their journey's end. Their team always consisted of
the best six horses that could be found, and their driver was the famous
Hank Monk of California, who, happening to be in Julesburg about that
time, volunteered to see them safely landed in Cisco on the summit of
the Sierra Nevada. They were enabled to change horses as near as
possible every hour, by telegraphing ahead in the morning, during the
day, and often far into the hours of night.

Starting from Julesburg early in the morning of the 17th, their first
resting place for a few hours at night was Granite Canyon, twenty miles
west of Cheyenne, and just at the foot of the pass over the Black Hills.
On the 18th, night-fall found them entering St. Mary's, at the further
end of the pass between Rattle Snake Hills and Elk Mountain. It was
after 5 o'clock and already dark on the 19th, when the travellers,
hurrying with all speed through the gloomy gorge of slate formation
leading to the banks of the Green River, found the ford too deep to be
ventured before morning. The 20th was a clear cold day very favorable
for brisk locomotion, and the bright sun had not quite disappeared
behind the Wahsatch Mountains when the Club men, having crossed the
Bear River, began to leave the lofty plateau of the Rocky Mountains by
the great inclined plane marked by the lines of the Echo and the Weber
Rivers on their way to the valley of the Great American Desert.

Quitting Castle Rock early on the morning of the 21st, they soon came in
sight of the Great Salt Lake, along the northern shores of which they
sped all day, taking shelter after night-fall at Terrace, in a miserable
log cabin surrounded by piles of drifting sand. The 22d was a terrible
day. The sand was blinding, the alkali dust choking, the ride for five
or six hours was up considerable grade; still they had accomplished
their 150 miles before resting for the night at Elko, even at this
period a flourishing little village on the banks of the Humboldt. After
another smothering ride on the 23d, they rested, at Winnemucca, another
flourishing village, situated at the precise point in the desert where
the Little Humboldt joins Humboldt River, without, however, making the
channel fuller or wider. The 24th was decidedly the hardest day, their
course lying through the worst part of the terrible Nevada desert. But a
glimpse of the Sierras looming in the western horizon gave them courage
and strength enough to reach Wadsworth, at their foot, a little before
midnight. Our travellers had now but one day's journey more to make
before reaching the railroad at Cisco, but, this being a very steep
ascent nearly all the way up, each mile cost almost twice as much time
and exertion.

At last, late in the evening of Christmas Day, amidst the most
enthusiastic cheers of all the inhabitants of Cisco, who welcomed them
with a splendid pine brand procession, Marston and his friends,
thoroughly used up, feet swelled, limbs bruised, bones aching, stomachs
seasick, eyes bleared, ears ringing, and brains on fire for want of
rest, took their places in the State Car waiting for them, and started
without a moment's delay for Sacramento, about a hundred miles distant.
How delicious was the change to our poor travellers! Washed, refreshed,
and lying at full length on luxurious sofas, their sensations, as the
locomotive spun them down the ringing grooves of the steep Sierras, can
be more easily imagined than described. They were all fast asleep when
the train entered Sacramento, but the Mayor and the other city
authorities who had waited up to receive them, had them carried
carefully, so as not to disturb their slumbers, on board the _Yo
Semite_, a fine steamer belonging to the California Navigation Company,
which landed them safely at San Francisco about noon on the 26th, after
accomplishing the extraordinary winter journey of 1500 miles over land
in little more than nine days, only about 200 miles being done by steam.

Half-past two P.M. found our travellers bathed, dressed, shaved, dined,
and ready to receive company in the grand parlor of the _Occidental
Hotel_. Captain Bloomsbury was the first to call.

Marston hobbled eagerly towards him and asked:

"What have you done towards fishing them up, Captain?"

"A good deal, Mr. Marston; indeed almost everything is ready."

"Is that really the case, Captain?" asked all, very agreeably surprised.

"Yes, gentlemen, I am most happy to state that I am quite in earnest."

"Can we start to-morrow?" asked General Morgan. "We have not a moment to
spare, you know."

"We can start at noon to-morrow at latest," replied the Captain, "if the
foundry men do a little extra work to-night."

"We must start this very day, Captain Bloomsbury," cried Marston
resolutely; "Barbican has been lying two weeks and thirteen hours in the
depths of the Pacific! If he is still alive, no thanks to Marston! He
must by this time have given me up! The grappling irons must be got on
board at once, Captain, and let us start this evening!"

At half-past four that very evening, a shot from the Fort and a lowering
of the Stars and Stripes from its flagstaff saluted the _Susquehanna_,
as she steamed proudly out of the Golden Gate at the lively rate of
fifteen knots an hour.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE CLUB MEN GO A FISHING.


Captain Bloomsbury was perfectly right when he said that almost
everything was ready for the commencement of the great work which the
Club men had to accomplish. Considering how much was required, this was
certainly saying a great deal; but here also, as on many other
occasions, fortune had singularly favored the Club men.

San Francisco Bay, as everybody knows, though one of the finest and
safest harbors in the world, is not without some danger from hidden
rocks. One of these in particular, the Anita Rock as it was called,
lying right in mid channel, had become so notorious for the wrecks of
which it was the cause, that, after much time spent in the consideration
of the subject, the authorities had at last determined to blow it up.
This undertaking having been very satisfactorily accomplished by means
of _dynamite_ or giant powder, another improvement in the harbor had
been also undertaken with great success. The wrecks of many vessels lay
scattered here and there pretty numerously, some, like that of the
_Flying Dragon_, in spots so shallow that they could be easily seen at
low water, but others sunk at least twenty fathoms deep, like that of
the _Caroline_, which had gone down in 1851, not far from Blossom Rock,
with a treasure on board of 20,000 ounces of gold. The attempt to clear
away these wrecks had also turned out very well; even sufficient
treasure had been recovered to repay all the expense, though the
preparations for the purpose by the contractors, M'Gowan and Co. had
been made on the most extensive scale, and in accordance with the latest
improvements in the apparatus for submarine operations.

Buoys, made of huge canvas sacks, coated with India rubber, and guarded
by a net work of strong cordage, had been manufactured and provided by
the _New York Submarine Company_. These buoys, when inflated and working
in pairs, had a lifting capacity of 30 tons a pair. Reservoirs of air,
provided with powerful compression pumps, always accompanied the buoys.
To attach the latter, in a collapsed condition, with strong chains to
the sides of the vessels which were to be lifted, a diving apparatus was
necessary. This also the _New York Company_ had provided, and it was so
perfect in its way that, by means of peculiar appliances of easy
management, the diver could walk about on the bottom, take his own
bearings, ascend to the surface at pleasure, and open his helmet without
assistance. A few sets likewise of Rouquayrol and Denayrouze's famous
submarine armor had been provided. These would prove of invaluable
advantage in all operations performed at great sea depths, as its
distinctive feature, "the regulator," could maintain, what is not done
by any other diving armor, a constant equality of pressure on the lungs
between the external and the internal air.

But perhaps the most useful article of all was a new form of diving bell
called the _Nautilus_, a kind of submarine boat, capable of lateral as
well as vertical movement at the will of its occupants. Constructed with
double sides, the intervening chambers could be filled either with water
or air according as descent or ascent was required. A proper supply of
water enabled the machine to descend to depths impossible to be reached
otherwise; this water could then be expelled by an ingenious
contrivance, which, replacing it with air, enabled the diver to rise
towards the surface as fast as he pleased.

All these and many other portions of the submarine apparatus which had
been employed that very year for clearing the channel, lifting the
wrecks and recovering the treasure, lay now at San Francisco, unused
fortunately on account of the season of the year, and therefore they
could be readily obtained for the asking. They had even been generously
offered to Captain Bloomsbury, who, in obedience to a telegram from
Washington, had kept his crew busily employed for nearly two weeks
night and day in transferring them all safely on board the
_Susquehanna_.

Marston was the first to make a careful inspection of every article
intended for the operation.

"Do you consider these buoys powerful enough to lift the Projectile,
Captain?" he asked next morning, as the vessel was briskly heading
southward, at a distance of ten or twelve miles from the coast on their
left.

"You can easily calculate that problem yourself, Mr. Marston," replied
the Captain. "It presents no difficulty. The Projectile weighs about 20
thousand pounds, or 10 tons?"

"Correct!"

"Well, a pair of these buoys when inflated can raise a weight of 30
tons."

"So far so good. But how do you propose attaching them to the
Projectile?"

"We simply let them descend in a state of collapse; the diver, going
down with them, will have no difficulty in making a fast connection. As
soon as they are inflated the Projectile will come up like a cork."

"Can the divers readily reach such depths?"

"That remains to be seen Mr. Marston."

"Captain," said Morgan, now joining the party, "you are a worthy member
of our Gun Club. You have done wonders. Heaven grant it may not be all
in vain! Who knows if our poor friends are still alive?"

"Hush!" cried Marston quickly. "Have more sense than to ask such
questions. Is Barbican alive! Am _I_ alive? They're all alive, I tell
you, only we must be quick about reaching them before the air gives out.
That's what's the matter! Air! Provisions, water--abundance! But
air--oh! that's their weak point! Quick, Captain, quick--They're
throwing the reel--I must see her rate!" So saying, he hurried off to
the stern, followed by General Morgan. Chief Engineer Murphy and the
Captain of the _Susquehanna_ were thus left for awhile together.

These two men had a long talk on the object of their journey and the
likelihood of anything satisfactory being accomplished. The man of the
sea candidly acknowledged his apprehensions. He had done everything in
his power towards collecting suitable machinery for fishing up the
Projectile, but he had done it all, he said, more as a matter of duty
than because he believed that any good could result from it; in fact, he
never expected to see the bold adventurers again either living or dead.
Murphy, who well understood not only what machinery was capable of
effecting, but also what it would surely fail in, at first expressed the
greatest confidence in the prosperous issue of the undertaking. But when
he learned, as he now did for the first time, that the ocean bed on
which the Projectile was lying could be hardly less than 20,000 feet
below the surface, he assumed a countenance as grave as the Captain's,
and at once confessed that, unless their usual luck stood by them, his
poor friends had not the slightest possible chance of ever being fished
up from the depths of the Pacific.

The conversation maintained among the officers and the others on board
the _Susquehanna_, was pretty much of the same nature. It is almost
needless to say that all heads--except Belfast's, whose scientific mind
rejected the Projectile theory with the most serene contempt--were
filled with the same idea, all hearts throbbed with the same emotion.
Wouldn't it be glorious to fish them up alive and well? What were they
doing just now? Doing? _Doing!_ Their bodies most probably were lying in
a shapeless pile on the floor of the Projectile, like a heap of clothes,
the uppermost man being the last smothered; or perhaps floating about in
the water inside the Projectile, like dead gold fish in an aquarium; or
perhaps burned to a cinder, like papers in a "champion" safe after a
great fire; or, who knows? perhaps at that very moment the poor fellows
were making their last and almost superhuman struggles to burst their
watery prison and ascend once more into the cheerful regions of light
and air! Alas! How vain must such puny efforts prove! Plunged into ocean
depths of three or four miles beneath the surface, subjected to an
inconceivable pressure of millions and millions of tons of sea water,
their metallic shroud was utterly unassailable from within, and utterly
unapproachable from without!

Early on the morning of December 29th, the Captain calculating from his
log that they must now be very near the spot where they had witnessed
the extraordinary phenomenon, the _Susquehanna_ hove to. Having to wait
till noon to find his exact position, he ordered the steamer to take a
short circular course of a few hours' duration, in hope of sighting the
buoy. But though at least a hundred telescopes scanned the calm ocean
breast for many miles in all directions, it was nowhere to be seen.

Precisely at noon, aided by his officers and in the presence of
Marston, Belfast, and the Gun Club Committee, the Captain took his
observations. After a moment or two of the most profound interest, it
was a great gratification to all to learn that the _Susquehanna_ was on
the right parallel, and only about 15 miles west of the precise spot
where the Projectile had disappeared beneath the waves. The steamer
started at once in the direction indicated, and a minute or two before
one o'clock the Captain said they were "there." No sign of the buoy
could yet be seen in any direction; it had probably been drifted
southward by the Mexican coast current which slowly glides along these
shores from December to April.

"At last!" cried Marston, with a sigh of great relief.

"Shall we commence at once?" asked the Captain.

"Without losing the twenty thousandth part of a second!" answered
Marston; "life or death depends upon our dispatch!"

The _Susquehanna_ again hove to, and this time all possible precautions
were taken to keep her in a state of perfect immobility--an operation
easily accomplished in these pacific latitudes, where cloud and wind and
water are often as motionless as if all life had died out of the world.
In fact, as the boats were quietly lowered, preparatory for beginning
the operations, the mirror like calmness of sea, sky, and ship so
impressed the Doctor, who was of a poetical turn of mind, that he could
not help exclaiming to the little Midshipman, who was standing nearest:

"Coleridge realized, with variations:

    The breeze drops down, the sail drops down,
      All's still as still can be;
    If we speak, it is only to break
      The silence of the sea.
    Still are the clouds, still are the shrouds,
      No life, no breath, no motion;
    Idle are all as a painted ship
      Upon a painted ocean!"

Chief Engineer Murphy now took command. Before letting down the buoys,
the first thing evidently to be done was to find out, if possible, the
precise point where the Projectile lay. For this purpose, the Nautilus
was clearly the only part of the machinery that could be employed with
advantage. Its chambers were accordingly soon filled with water, its air
reservoirs were also soon completely charged, and the Nautilus itself,
suspended by chains from the end of a yard, lay quietly on the ocean
surface, its manhole on the top remaining open for the reception of
those who were willing to encounter the dangers that awaited it in the
fearful depths of the Pacific. Every one looking on was well aware that,
after a few hundred feet below the surface, the pressure would grow more
and more enormous, until at last it became quite doubtful if any line
could bear the tremendous strain. It was even possible that at a certain
depth the walls of the Nautilus might be crushed in like an eggshell,
and the whole machine made as flat as two leaves of paper pasted
together.

Perfectly conscious of the nature of the tremendous risk they were about
to run, Marston, Morgan, and Murphy quietly bade their friends a short
farewell and were lowered into the manhole. The Nautilus having room
enough for four, Belfast had been expected to be of the party but,
feeling a little sea sick, the Professor backed out at the last moment,
to the great joy of Mr. Watkins, the famous reporter of the _N.Y.
Herald_, who was immediately allowed to take his place.

Every provision against immediate danger had been made. By means of
preconcerted signals, the inmates could have themselves drawn up, let
down, or carried laterally in whatever direction they pleased. By
barometers and other instruments they could readily ascertain the
pressure of the air and water, also how far they had descended and at
what rate they were moving. The Captain, from his bridge, carefully
superintended every detail of the operation. All signals he insisted on
attending to himself personally, transmitting them instantly by his bell
to the engineer below. The whole power of the steam engine had been
brought to bear on the windlass; the chains could withstand an enormous
strain. The wheels had been carefully oiled and tested beforehand; the
signalling apparatus had been subjected to the rigidest examination; and
every portion of the machinery had been proved to be in admirable
working order.

The chances of immediate and unforeseen danger, it is true, had been
somewhat diminished by all these precautions. The risk, nevertheless,
was fearful. The slightest accident or even carelessness might easily
lead to the most disastrous consequence.

Five minutes after two o'clock, the manhole being closed, the lamps lit,
and everything pronounced all right, the signal for the descent was
given, and the Nautilus immediately disappeared beneath the waters. A
double anxiety now possessed all on board the _Susquehanna_: the
prisoners in the Nautilus were in danger as well as the prisoners in the
Projectile. Marston and his friends, however, were anything but
disquieted on their own account, and, pencil in hand and noses flattened
on the glass plates, they examined carefully everything they could see
in the liquid masses through which they were descending.

For the first five hundred feet, the descent was accomplished with
little trouble. The Nautilus sank rather slowly, at a uniform rate of a
foot to the second. It had not been two minutes under water when the
light of day completely disappeared. But for this the occupants were
fully prepared, having provided themselves with powerful lamps, whose
brilliant light, radiating from polished reflectors, gave them an
opportunity of seeing clearly around it for a distance of eight or ten
feet in all directions. Owing to the superlatively excellent
construction of the Nautilus, also on account of the _scaphanders_, or
suits of diving armor, with which Marston and his friends had clothed
themselves, the disagreeable sensations to which divers are ordinarily
exposed, were hardly felt at all in the beginning of the descent.

Marston was about to congratulate his companions on the favorable
auspices inaugurating their trip, when Murphy, consulting the
instrument, discovered to his great surprise that the Nautilus was not
making its time. In reply to their signal "faster!" the downward
movement increased a little, but it soon relaxed again. Instead of less
than two minutes, as at the beginning, it now took twelve minutes to
make a hundred feet. They had gone only seven hundred feet in
thirty-seven minutes. In spite of repeated signalling, their progress
during the next hour was even still more alarming, one hundred feet
taking exactly 59 minutes. To shorten detail, it required two hours more
to make another hundred feet; and then the Nautilus, after taking ten
minutes to crawl an inch further, came to a perfect stand still. The
pressure of the water had evidently now become too enormous to allow
further descent.

The Clubmen's distress was very great; Marston's, in particular, was
indescribable. In vain, catching at straws, he signalled "eastwards!"
"westwards!" "northwards!" or "southwards!" the Nautilus moved readily
every way but downwards.

"Oh! what shall we do?" he cried in despair; "Barbican, must we really
give you up though separated from us by the short distance of only a few
miles?"

At last, nothing better being to be done, the unwilling signal "heave
upwards!" was given, and the hauling up commenced. It was done very
slowly, and with the greatest care. A sudden jerk might snap the chains;
an incautious twist might put a kink on the air tube; besides, it was
well known that the sudden removal of heavy pressure resulting from
rapid ascent, is attended by very disagreeable sensations, which have
sometimes even proved fatal.

It was near midnight when the Clubmen were lifted out of the manhole.
Their faces were pale, their eyes bloodshot, their figures stooped. Even
the _Herald_ Reporter seemed to have got enough of exploring. But
Marston was as confident as ever, and tried to be as brisk.

He had hardly swallowed the refreshment so positively enjoined in the
circumstances, when he abruptly addressed the Captain:

"What's the weight of your heaviest cannon balls?"

"Thirty pounds, Mr. Marston."

"Can't you attach thirty of them to the Nautilus and sink us again?"

"Certainly, Mr. Marston, if you wish it. It shall be the first thing
done to-morrow."

"To-night, Captain! At once! Barbican has not an instant to lose."

"At once then be it, Mr. Marston. Just as you say."

The new sinkers were soon attached to the Nautilus, which disappeared
once more with all its former occupants inside, except the _Herald_
Reporter, who had fallen asleep over his notes, or at least seemed to
be. He had probably made up his mind as to the likelihood of the
Nautilus ever getting back again.

The second descent was quicker than the first, but just as futile. At
1152 feet, the Nautilus positively refused to go a single inch further.
Marston looked like a man in a stupor. He made no objection to the
signal given by the others to return; he even helped to cut the ropes by
which the cannon balls had been attached. Not a single word was spoken
by the party, as they slowly rose to the surface. Marston seemed to be
struggling against despair. For the first time, the impossibility of the
great enterprise seemed to dawn upon him. He and his friends had
undertaken a great fight with the mighty Ocean, which now played with
them as a giant with a pigmy. To reach the bottom was evidently
completely out of their power; and what was infinitely worse, there was
nothing to be gained by reaching it. The Projectile was not on the
bottom; it could not even have got to the bottom. Marston said it all in
a few words to the Captain, as the Clubmen stepped on deck a few hours
later:

"Barbican is floating midway in the depths of the Pacific, like Mahomet
in his coffin!"

Blindly yielding, however, to the melancholy hope that is born of
despair, Marston and his friends renewed the search next day, the 30th,
but they were all too worn out with watching and excitement to be able
to continue it longer than a few hours. After a night's rest, it was
renewed the day following, the 31st, with some vigor, and a good part of
the ocean lying between Guadalupe and Benito islands was carefully
investigated to a depth of seven or eight hundred feet. No traces
whatever of the Projectile. Several California steamers, plying between
San Francisco and Panama, passed the _Susquehanna_ within hailing
distance. But to every question, the invariable reply one melancholy
burden bore:

"No luck!"

All hands were now in despair. Marston could neither eat nor drink. He
never even spoke the whole day, except on two occasions. Once, when
somebody heard him muttering:

"He's now seventeen days in the ocean!"

The second time he spoke, the words seemed to be forced out of him.
Belfast admitted, for the sake of argument, that the Projectile had
fallen into the ocean, but he strongly denounced the absurd idea of its
occupants being still alive. "Under such circumstances," went on the
learned Professor, "further prolongation of vital energy would be simply
impossible. Want of air, want of food, want of courage--"

"No, sir!" interrupted Marston quite savagely. "Want of air, of meat, of
drink, as much as you like! But when you speak of Barbican's want of
courage, you don't know what you are talking about! No holy martyr ever
died at the stake with a loftier courage than my noble friend
Barbican!"

That night he asked the Captain if he would not sail down as far as Cape
San Lucas. Bloomsbury saw that further search was all labor lost, but he
respected such heroic grief too highly to give a positive refusal. He
consented to devote the following day, New Year's, to an exploring
expedition as far as Magdalena Bay, making the most diligent inquiries
in all directions.

But New Year's was just as barren of results as any of its predecessors,
and, a little before sunset, Captain Bloomsbury, regardless of further
entreaties and unwilling to risk further delay, gave orders to 'bout
ship and return to San Francisco.

The _Susquehanna_ was slowly turning around in obedience to her wheel,
as if reluctant to abandon forever a search in which humanity at large
was interested, when the look-out man, stationed in the forecastle,
suddenly sang out:

"A buoy to the nor'east, not far from shore!"

All telescopes were instantly turned in the direction indicated. The
buoy, or whatever object it was, could be readily distinguished. It
certainly did look like one of those buoys used to mark out the channel
that ships follow when entering a harbor. But as the vessel slowly
approached it, a small flag, flapping in the dying wind--a strange
feature in a buoy--was seen to surmount its cone, which a nearer
approach showed to be emerging four or five feet from the water. And for
a buoy too it was exceedingly bright and shiny, reflecting the red rays
of the setting sun as strongly as if its surface was crystal or polished
metal!

"Call Mr. Marston on deck at once!" cried the Captain, his voice
betraying unwonted excitement as he put the glass again to his eye.

Marston, thoroughly worn out by his incessant anxiety during the day,
had been just carried below by his friends, and they were now trying to
make him take a little refreshment and repose. But the Captain's order
brought them all on deck like a flash.

They found the whole crew gazing in one direction, and, though speaking
in little more than whispers, evidently in a state of extraordinary
excitement.

What could all this mean? Was there any ground for hope? The thought
sent a pang of delight through Marston's wildly beating heart that
almost choked him.

The Captain beckoned to the Club men to take a place on the bridge
beside himself. They instantly obeyed, all quietly yielding them a
passage.

The vessel was now only about a quarter of a mile distant from the
object and therefore near enough to allow it to be distinguished without
the aid of a glass.

What! The flag bore the well known Stars and Stripes!

An electric shudder of glad surprise shot through the assembled crowd.
They still spoke, however, in whispers, hardly daring to utter their
thoughts aloud.

The silence was suddenly startled by a howl of mingled ecstasy and rage
from Marston.

He would have fallen off the bridge, had not the others held him firmly.
Then he burst into a laugh loud and long, and quite as formidable as his
howl.

Then he tore away from his friends, and began beating himself over the
head.

"Oh!" he cried in accents between a yell and a groan, "what chuckleheads
we are! What numskulls! What jackasses! What double-treble-barrelled
gibbering idiots!" Then he fell to beating himself over the head again.

"What's the matter, Marston, for heaven's sake!" cried his friends,
vainly trying to hold him.

"Speak for yourself!" cried others, Belfast among the number.

"No exception, Belfast! You're as bad as the rest of us! We're all a set
of unmitigated, demoralized, dog-goned old lunatics! Ha! Ha! Ha!"

"Speak plainly, Marston! Tell us what you mean!"

"I mean," roared the terrible Secretary, "that we are no better than a
lot of cabbage heads, dead beats, and frauds, calling ourselves
scientists! O Barbican, how you must blush for us! If we were
schoolboys, we should all be skinned alive for our ignorance! Do you
forget, you herd of ignoramuses, that the Projectile weighs only ten
tons?"

"We don't forget it! We know it well! What of it?"

"This of it: it can't sink in water without displacing its own volume
in water; its own volume in water weighs thirty tons! Consequently, it
can't sink; more consequently, it hasn't sunk; and, most consequently,
there it is before us, bobbing up and down all the time under our very
noses! O Barbican, how can we ever venture to look at you straight in
the face again!"

Marston's extravagant manner of showing it did not prevent him from
being perfectly right. With all their knowledge of physics, not a single
one of those scientific gentlemen had remembered the great fundamental
law that governs sinking or floating bodies. Thanks to its slight
specific gravity, the Projectile, after reaching unknown depths of ocean
through the terrific momentum of its fall, had been at last arrested in
its course and even obliged to return to the surface.

By this time, all the passengers of the _Susquehanna_ could easily
recognize the object of such weary longings and desperate searches,
floating quietly a short distance before them in the last rays of the
declining day!

The boats were out in an instant. Marston and his friends took the
Captain's gig. The rowers pulled with a will towards the rapidly nearing
Projectile. What did it contain? The living or the dead? The living
certainly! as Marston whispered to those around him; otherwise how could
they have ever run up that flag?

The boats approached in perfect silence, all hearts throbbing with the
intensity of newly awakened hope, all eyes eagerly watching for some
sign to confirm it. No part of the windows appeared over the water, but
the trap hole had been thrown open, and through it came the pole that
bore the American flag. Marston made for the trap hole and, as it was
only a few feet above the surface, he had no difficulty in looking in.

At that moment, a joyful shout of triumph rose from the interior, and
the whole boat's crew heard a dry drawling voice with a nasal twang
exclaiming:

"Queen! How is that for high?"

It was instantly answered by another voice, shriller, louder, quicker,
more joyous and triumphant in tone, but slightly tinged with a foreign
accent:

"King! My brave Mac! How is that for high?"

The deep, clear, calm voice that spoke next thrilled the listeners
outside with an emotion that we shall not attempt to portray. Except
that their ears could detect in it the faintest possible emotion of
triumph, it was in all respects as cool, resolute, and self-possessed as
ever:

"Ace! Dear friends, how is that for high?"

They were quietly enjoying a little game of High-Low-Jack!

[Illustration: HOW IS THAT FOR HIGH?]

How they must have been startled by the wild cheers that suddenly rang
around their ocean-prison! How madly were these cheers re-echoed from
the decks of the _Susquehanna_! Who can describe the welcome that
greeted these long lost, long beloved, long despaired of Sons of Earth,
now so suddenly and unexpectedly rescued from destruction, and
restored once more to the wonderstricken eyes of admiring humanity? Who
can describe the scenes of joy and exuberant happiness, and deep felt
gratitude, and roaring rollicking merriment, that were witnessed on
board the steamer that night and during the next three days!

As for Marston, it need hardly be said that he was simply ecstatic, but
it may interest both the psychologist and the philologist to learn that
the expression _How is that for high?_ struck him at once as with a kind
of frenzy. It became immediately such a favorite tongue morsel of his
that ever since he has been employing it on all occasions, appropriate
or otherwise. Thanks to his exertions in its behalf all over the
country, the phrase is now the most popular of the day, well known and
relished in every part of the Union. If we can judge from its present
hold on the popular ear it will continue to live and flourish for many a
long day to come; it may even be accepted as the popular expression of
triumph in those dim, distant, future years when the memory not only of
the wonderful occasion of its formation but also of the illustrious men
themselves who originated it, has been consigned forever to the dark
tomb of oblivion!




CHAPTER XXIV.

FAREWELL TO THE BALTIMORE GUN CLUB.


The intense interest of our extraordinary but most veracious history
having reached its culmination at the end of the last chapter, our
absorbing chronicle might with every propriety have been then and there
concluded; but we can't part from our gracious and most indulgent reader
before giving him a few more details which may be instructive perhaps,
if not amusing.

No doubt he kindly remembers the world-wide sympathy with which our
three famous travellers had started on their memorable trip to the Moon.
If so, he may be able to form some idea of the enthusiasm universally
excited by the news of their safe return. Would not the millions of
spectators that had thronged Florida to witness their departure, now
rush to the other extremity of the Union to welcome them back? Could
those innumerable Europeans, Africans and Asiatics, who had visited the
United States simply to have a look at M'Nicholl, Ardan and Barbican,
ever think of quitting the country without having seen those wonderful
men again? Certainly not! Nay, more--the reception and the welcome that
those heroes would everywhere be greeted with, should be on a scale
fully commensurate with the grandeur of their own gigantic enterprise.
The Sons of Earth who had fearlessly quitted this terrestrial globe and
who had succeeded in returning after accomplishing a journey
inconceivably wonderful, well deserved to be received with every
extremity of pride, pomp and glorious circumstance that the world is
capable of displaying.

To catch a glimpse of these demi-gods, to hear the sound of their
voices, perhaps even to touch their hands--these were the only emotions
with which the great heart of the country at large was now throbbing.

To gratify this natural yearning of humanity, to afford not only to
every foreigner but to every native in the land an opportunity of
beholding the three heroes who had reflected such indelible glory on the
American name, and to do it all in a manner eminently worthy of the
great American Nation, instantly became the desire of the American
People.

To desire a thing, and to have it, are synonymous terms with the great
people of the American Republic.

A little thinking simplified the matter considerably: as all the people
could not go to the heroes, the heroes should go to all the people.

So decided, so done.

It was nearly two months before Barbican and his friends could get back
to Baltimore. The winter travelling over the Rocky Mountains had been
very difficult on account of the heavy snows, and, even when they found
themselves in the level country, though they tried to travel as
privately as possible, and for the present positively declined all
public receptions, they were compelled to spend some time in the houses
of the warm friends near whom they passed in the course of their long
journey.

The rough notes of their Moon adventures--the only ones that they could
furnish just then--circulating like wild fire and devoured with
universal avidity, only imparted a keener whet to the public desire to
feast their eyes on such men. These notes were telegraphed free to every
newspaper in the country, but the longest and best account of the
"_Journey to the Moon_" appeared in the columns of the _New York
Herald_, owing to the fact that Watkins the reporter had had the
adventurers all to himself during the whole of the three days' trip of
the _Susquehanna_ back to San Francisco. In a week after their return,
every man, woman, and child in the United States knew by heart some of
the main facts and incidents in the famous journey; but, of course, it
is needless to say that they knew nothing at all about the finer points
and the highly interesting minor details of the astounding story. These
are now all laid before the highly favored reader for the first time. I
presume it is unnecessary to add that they are worthy of his most
implicit confidence, having been industriously and conscientiously
compiled from the daily journals of the three travellers, revised,
corrected, and digested very carefully by Barbican himself.

It was, of course, too early at this period for the critics to pass a
decided opinion on the nature of the information furnished by our
travellers. Besides, the Moon is an exceedingly difficult subject. Very
few newspaper men in the country are capable of offering a single
opinion regarding her that is worth reading. This is probably also the
reason why half-scientists talk so much dogmatic nonsense about her.

Enough, however, had appeared in the notes to warrant the general
opinion that Barbican's explorations had set at rest forever several pet
theories lately started regarding the nature of our satellite. He and
his friends had seen her with their own eyes, and under such favorable
circumstances as to be altogether exceptional. Regarding her formation,
her origin, her inhabitability, they could easily tell what system
_should_ be rejected and what _might_ be admitted. Her past, her
present, and her future, had been alike laid bare before their eyes. How
can you object to the positive assertion of a conscientious man who has
passed within a few hundred miles of _Tycho_, the culminating point in
the strangest of all the strange systems of lunar oreography? What reply
can you make to a man who has sounded the dark abysses of the _Plato_
crater? How can you dare to contradict those men whom the vicissitudes
of their daring journey had swept over the dark, Invisible Face of the
Moon, never before revealed to human eye? It was now confessedly the
privilege and the right of these men to set limits to that selenographic
science which had till now been making itself so very busy in
reconstructing the lunar world. They could now say, authoritatively,
like Cuvier lecturing over a fossil skeleton: "Once the Moon was this, a
habitable world, and inhabitable long before our Earth! And now the Moon
is that, an uninhabitable world, and uninhabitable ages and ages ago!"

We must not even dream of undertaking a description of the grand _fête_
by which the return of the illustrious members of the Gun Club was to be
adequately celebrated, and the natural curiosity of their countrymen to
see them was to be reasonably gratified. It was one worthy in every way
of its recipients, worthy of the Gun Club, worthy of the Great Republic,
and, best of all, every man, woman, and child in the United States could
take part in it. It required at least three months to prepare it: but
this was not to be regretted as its leading idea could not be properly
carried out during the severe colds of winter.

All the great railroads of the Union had been closely united by
temporary rails, a uniform gauge had been everywhere adopted, and every
other necessary arrangement had been made to enable a splendid palace
car, expressly manufactured for the occasion by Pullman himself, to
visit every chief point in the United States without ever breaking
connection. Through the principal street in each city, or streets if one
was not large enough, rails had been laid so as to admit the passage of
the triumphal car. In many cities, as a precaution against unfavorable
weather, these streets had been arched over with glass, thus becoming
grand arcades, many of which have been allowed to remain so to the
present day. The houses lining these streets, hung with tapestry,
decorated with flowers, waving with banners, were all to be illuminated
at night time in a style at once both the most brilliant and the most
tasteful. On the sidewalks, tables had been laid, often miles and miles
long, at the public expense; these were to be covered with every kind of
eatables, exquisitely cooked, in the greatest profusion, and free to
everyone for twelve hours before the arrival of the illustrious guests
and also for twelve hours after their departure. The idea mainly aimed
at was that, at the grand national banquet about to take place, every
inhabitant of the United States, without exception, could consider
Barbican and his companions as his own particular guests for the time
being, thus giving them a welcome the heartiest and most unanimous that
the world has ever yet witnessed.

Evergreens were to deck the lamp-posts; triumphal arches to span the
streets; fountains, squirting _eau de cologne_, to perfume and cool the
air; bands, stationed at proper intervals, to play the most inspiring
music; and boys and girls from public and private schools, dressed in
picturesque attire, to sing songs of joy and glory. The people, seated
at the banquetting tables, were to rise and cheer and toast the heroes
as they passed; the military companies, in splendid uniforms, were to
salute them with presented arms; while the bells pealed from the church
towers, the great guns roared from the armories, _feux de joie_
resounded from the ships in the harbor, until the day's wildest whirl of
excitement was continued far into the night by a general illumination
and a surpassing display of fireworks. Right in the very heart of the
city, the slowly moving triumphal car was always to halt long enough to
allow the Club men to join the cheering citizens at their meal, which
was to be breakfast, dinner or supper according to that part of the day
at which the halt was made.

The number of champagne bottles drunk on these occasions, or of the
speeches made, or of the jokes told, or of the toasts offered, or of the
hands shaken, of course, I cannot now weary my kind reader by detailing,
though I have the whole account lying before me in black and white,
written out day by day in Barbican's own bold hand. Yet I should like to
give a few extracts from this wonderful journal. It is a perfect model
of accuracy and system. Whether detailing his own doings or those of the
innumerable people he met, Caesar himself never wrote anything more
lucid or more pointed. But nothing sets the extraordinary nature of this
great man in a better light than the firm, commanding, masterly
character of the handwriting in which these records are made. The
elegant penmanship all through might easily pass for copper plate
engraving--except on one page, dated "_Boston, after dinner_," where,
candor compels me to acknowledge, the "Solid Men" appear to have
succeeded in rendering his iron nerves the least bit wabbly.

The palace car had been so constructed that, by turning a few cranks and
pulling out a few bolts, it was transformed at once into a highly
decorated and extremely comfortable open barouche. Marston took the seat
usually occupied by the driver: Ardan and M'Nicholl sat immediately
under him, face to face with Barbican, who, in order that everyone might
be able to distinguish him, was to keep all the back seat for himself,
the post of honor.

On Monday morning, the fifth of May, a month generally the pleasantest
in the United States, the grand national banquet commenced in Baltimore,
and lasted twenty-four hours. The Gun Club insisted on paying all the
expenses of the day, and the city compromised by being allowed to
celebrate in whatever way it pleased the reception of the Club men on
their return.

They started on their trip that same day in the midst of one of the
grandest ovations possible to conceive. They stopped for a little while
at Wilmington, but they took dinner in Philadelphia, where the splendor
of Broad Street (at present the finest boulevard in the world, being 113
feet wide and five miles long) can be more easily alluded to than even
partially described.

The house fronts glittered with flowers, flags, pictures, tapestries,
and other decorations; the chimneys and roofs swarmed with men and boys
cheerfully risking their necks every moment to get one glance at the
"Moon men"; every window was a brilliant bouquet of beautiful ladies
waving their scented handkerchiefs and showering their sweetest smiles;
the elevated tables on the sidewalks, groaning with an abundance of
excellent and varied food, were lined with men, women, and children,
who, however occupied in eating and drinking, never forgot to salute the
heroes, cheering them lustily as they slowly moved along; the spacious
street itself, just paved from end to end with smooth Belgian blocks,
was a living moving panorama of soldiers, temperance men, free masons,
and other societies, radiant in gorgeous uniforms, brilliant in flashing
banners, and simply perfect in the rhythmic cadence of their tread,
wings of delicious music seeming to bear them onward in their proud and
stately march.

A vast awning, spanning the street from ridge to ridge, had been so
prepared and arranged that, in case of rain or too strong a glare from
the summer sun, it could be opened out wholly or partially in the space
of a very few minutes. There was not, however, the slightest occasion
for using it, the weather being exceedingly fine, almost paradisiacal,
as Marston loved to phrase it.

[Illustration: THEIR ARRIVAL WAS WELCOMED WITH EQUAL _FURORE_.]

The "Moon men" supped and spent the night in New York, where they were
received with even greater enthusiasm than at Philadelphia. But no
detailed description can be given of their majestic progress from city
to city through all portions of the mighty Republic. It is enough to say
that they visited every important town from Portland to San Francisco,
from Salt Lake City to New Orleans, from Mobile to Charleston, and from
Saint Louis to Baltimore; that, in every section of the great country,
preparations for their reception were equally as enthusiastic, their
arrival was welcomed with equal _furore_, and their departure
accompanied with an equal amount of affectionate and touching sympathy.

The _New York Herald_ reporter, Mr. Watkins, followed them closely
everywhere in a palace car of his own, and kept the public fully
enlightened regarding every incident worth regarding along the route,
almost as soon as it happened. He was enabled to do this by means of a
portable telegraphic machine of new and most ingenious construction.
Though its motive power was electricity, it could dispense with the
ordinary instruments and even with wires altogether, yet it managed to
transmit messages to most parts of the world with an accuracy that,
considering how seldom it failed, is almost miraculous. The principle
actuating it, though guessed at by many shrewd scientists, is still a
profound secret and will probably remain so for some time longer, the
_Herald_ having purchased the right to its sole and exclusive use for
fifteen years, at an enormous cost.

Who shall say that the apotheosis of our three heroes was not worthy of
them, or that, had they lived in the old prehistoric times, they would
not have taken the loftiest places among the demi-gods?

As the tremendous whirl of excitement began slowly to die away, the
more thoughtful heads of the Great Republic began asking each other a
few questions:

Can this wonderful journey, unprecedented in the annals of wonderful
journeys, ever lead to any practical result?

Shall we ever live to see direct communication established with the
Moon?

Will any Air Line of space navigation ever undertake to start a system
of locomotion between the different members of the solar system?

Have we any reasonable grounds for ever expecting to see trains running
between planet and planet, as from Mars to Jupiter and, possibly
afterwards, from star to star, as from Polaris to Sirius?

Even to-day these are exceedingly puzzling questions, and, with all our
much vaunted scientific progress, such as "no fellow can make out." But
if we only reflect a moment on the audacious go-a-headiveness of the
Yankee branch of the Anglo Saxon race, we shall easily conclude that the
American people will never rest quietly until they have pushed to its
last result and to every logical consequence the astounding step so
daringly conceived and so wonderfully carried out by their great
countryman Barbican.

In fact, within a very few months after the return of the Club men from
the Continental Banquet, as it was called in the papers, the country was
flooded by a number of little books, like Insurance pamphlets, thrust
into every letter box and pushed under every door, announcing the
formation of a new company called _The Grand Interstellar Communication
Society_. The Capital was to be 100 million dollars, at a thousand
dollars a share: J.P. BARBICAN, ESQ., P.G.C. was to be President;
Colonel JOSHUA D. M'NICHOLL, Vice-President; Hon. J.T. MARSTON,
Secretary; Chevalier MICHAEL ARDAN, General Manager; JOHN MURPHY, ESQ.,
Chief Engineer; H. PHILLIPS COLEMAN, ESQ. (Philadelphia lawyer), Legal
Adviser; and the Astrological Adviser was to be Professor HENRY of
Washington. (Belfast's blunder had injured him so much in public
estimation, his former partisans having become his most merciless
revilers, that it was considered advisable to omit his name altogether
even in the list of the Directors.)

From the very beginning, the moneyed public looked on the G.I.C.S, with
decided favor, and its shares were bought up pretty freely. Conducted on
strictly honorable principles, keeping carefully aloof from all such
damaging connection as the _Credit Mobilier_, and having its books
always thrown open for public inspection, its reputation even to-day is
excellent and continually improving in the popular estimation. Holding
out no utopian inducements to catch the unwary, and making no wheedling
promises to blind the guileless, it states its great objects with all
their great advantages, without at the same time suppressing its
enormous and perhaps insuperable difficulties. People know exactly what
to think of it, and, whether it ever meets with perfect success or
proves a complete failure, no one in the country will ever think of
casting a slur on the bright name of its peerless President, J.P.
Barbican.

For a few years this great man devoted every faculty of his mind to the
furthering of the Company's objects. But in the midst of his labors, the
rapid approach of the CENTENNIAL surprised him. After a long and careful
consultation on the subject, the Directors and Stockholders of the
G.I.C.S. advised him to suspend all further labors in their behalf for a
few years, in order that he might be freer to devote the full energies
of his giant intellect towards celebrating the first hundredth
anniversary of his country's Independence--as all true Americans would
wish to see it celebrated--in a manner every way worthy of the GREAT
REPUBLIC OF THE WEST!

Obeying orders instantly and with the single-idea'd, unselfish
enthusiasm of his nature, he threw himself at once heart and soul into
the great enterprise. Though possessing no official prominence--this he
absolutely insists upon--he is well known to be the great fountain head
whence emanate all the life, order, dispatch, simplicity, economy, and
wonderful harmony which, so far, have so eminently characterized the
magnificent project. With all operations for raising the necessary
funds--further than by giving some sound practical advice--he positively
refused to connect himself (this may be the reason why subscriptions to
the Centennial stock are so slow in coming in), but in the proper
apportionment of expenses and the strict surveillance of the mechanical,
engineering, and architectural departments, his services have proved
invaluable. His experience in the vast operations at Stony Hill has
given him great skill in the difficult art of managing men. His voice is
seldom heard at the meetings, but when it is, people seem to take a
pleasure in readily submitting to its dictates.

In wet weather or dry, in hot weather or cold, he may still be seen
every day at Fairmount Park, Philadelphia, leisurely strolling from
building to building, picking his steps quietly through the bustling
crowds of busy workmen, never speaking a word, not even to Marston his
faithful shadow, often pencilling something in his pocket book, stopping
occasionally to look apparently nowhere, but never, you may be sure,
allowing a single detail in the restless panorama around him to escape
the piercing shaft of his eagle glance.

He is evidently determined on rendering the great CENTENNIAL of his
country a still greater and more wonderful success than even his own
world-famous and never to be forgotten JOURNEY through the boundless
fields of ether, and ALL AROUND THE MOON!

END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of All Around the Moon, by Jules Verne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL AROUND THE MOON ***

***** This file should be named 16457-8.txt or 16457-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/4/5/16457/

Produced by Afra Ullah, Taavi Kalju and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of On the Origin of Species, by Charles Darwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: On the Origin of Species
       6th Edition

Author: Charles Darwin

Release Date: December, 1999  [Etext #2009]
Posting Date: November 23, 2009

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES ***




Produced by Sue Asscher





THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES BY MEANS OF NATURAL SELECTION;

or, the PRESERVATION OF FAVOURED RACES IN THE STRUGGLE FOR LIFE.

By Charles Darwin, M.A., F.R.S.,

Author of "The Descent of Man," etc., etc.


Sixth London Edition, with all Additions and Corrections.

The 6th Edition is often considered the definitive edition.

Also see Project Gutenberg Etext #1228 for the First Edition.



"But with regard to the material world, we can at least go so far as
this--we can perceive that events are brought about not by insulated
interpositions of Divine power, exerted in each particular case, but by
the establishment of general laws."--Whewell: "Bridgewater Treatise".

"The only distinct meaning of the word 'natural' is STATED, FIXED or
SETTLED; since what is natural as much requires and presupposes an
intelligent agent to render it so, i.e., to effect it continually or at
stated times, as what is supernatural or miraculous does to effect it
for once."--Butler: "Analogy of Revealed Religion".

"To conclude, therefore, let no man out of a weak conceit of sobriety,
or an ill-applied moderation, think or maintain, that a man can search
too far or be too well studied in the book of God's word, or in the book
of God's works; divinity or philosophy; but rather let men endeavour
an endless progress or proficience in both."--Bacon: "Advancement of
Learning".




AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE PROGRESS OF OPINION ON THE ORIGIN OF
SPECIES,

PREVIOUSLY TO THE PUBLICATION OF THE FIRST EDITION OF THIS WORK.

I will here give a brief sketch of the progress of opinion on the Origin
of Species. Until recently the great majority of naturalists believed
that species were immutable productions, and had been separately
created. This view has been ably maintained by many authors. Some few
naturalists, on the other hand, have believed that species undergo
modification, and that the existing forms of life are the descendants
by true generation of pre existing forms. Passing over allusions to
the subject in the classical writers (Aristotle, in his "Physicae
Auscultationes" (lib.2, cap.8, s.2), after remarking that rain does not
fall in order to make the corn grow, any more than it falls to spoil the
farmer's corn when threshed out of doors, applies the same argument
to organisation; and adds (as translated by Mr. Clair Grece, who first
pointed out the passage to me), "So what hinders the different parts (of
the body) from having this merely accidental relation in nature? as the
teeth, for example, grow by necessity, the front ones sharp, adapted
for dividing, and the grinders flat, and serviceable for masticating
the food; since they were not made for the sake of this, but it was the
result of accident. And in like manner as to other parts in which there
appears to exist an adaptation to an end. Wheresoever, therefore, all
things together (that is all the parts of one whole) happened like as if
they were made for the sake of something, these were preserved,
having been appropriately constituted by an internal spontaneity; and
whatsoever things were not thus constituted, perished and still perish."
We here see the principle of natural selection shadowed forth, but
how little Aristotle fully comprehended the principle, is shown by his
remarks on the formation of the teeth.), the first author who in modern
times has treated it in a scientific spirit was Buffon. But as his
opinions fluctuated greatly at different periods, and as he does not
enter on the causes or means of the transformation of species, I need
not here enter on details.

Lamarck was the first man whose conclusions on the subject excited much
attention. This justly celebrated naturalist first published his views
in 1801; he much enlarged them in 1809 in his "Philosophie Zoologique",
and subsequently, 1815, in the Introduction to his "Hist. Nat. des
Animaux sans Vertebres". In these works he up holds the doctrine that
all species, including man, are descended from other species. He first
did the eminent service of arousing attention to the probability of
all change in the organic, as well as in the inorganic world, being the
result of law, and not of miraculous interposition. Lamarck seems
to have been chiefly led to his conclusion on the gradual change of
species, by the difficulty of distinguishing species and varieties,
by the almost perfect gradation of forms in certain groups, and by
the analogy of domestic productions. With respect to the means of
modification, he attributed something to the direct action of the
physical conditions of life, something to the crossing of already
existing forms, and much to use and disuse, that is, to the effects of
habit. To this latter agency he seems to attribute all the beautiful
adaptations in nature; such as the long neck of the giraffe for
browsing on the branches of trees. But he likewise believed in a law
of progressive development, and as all the forms of life thus tend to
progress, in order to account for the existence at the present day of
simple productions, he maintains that such forms are now spontaneously
generated. (I have taken the date of the first publication of Lamarck
from Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire's ("Hist. Nat. Generale", tom. ii.
page 405, 1859) excellent history of opinion on this subject. In
this work a full account is given of Buffon's conclusions on the same
subject. It is curious how largely my grandfather, Dr. Erasmus Darwin,
anticipated the views and erroneous grounds of opinion of Lamarck in
his "Zoonomia" (vol. i. pages 500-510), published in 1794. According to
Isid. Geoffroy there is no doubt that Goethe was an extreme partisan of
similar views, as shown in the introduction to a work written in 1794
and 1795, but not published till long afterward; he has pointedly
remarked ("Goethe als Naturforscher", von Dr. Karl Meding, s. 34) that
the future question for naturalists will be how, for instance, cattle
got their horns and not for what they are used. It is rather a singular
instance of the manner in which similar views arise at about the same
time, that Goethe in Germany, Dr. Darwin in England, and Geoffroy
Saint-Hilaire (as we shall immediately see) in France, came to the same
conclusion on the origin of species, in the years 1794-5.)

Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, as is stated in his "Life", written by his
son, suspected, as early as 1795, that what we call species are various
degenerations of the same type. It was not until 1828 that he published
his conviction that the same forms have not been perpetuated since
the origin of all things. Geoffroy seems to have relied chiefly on the
conditions of life, or the "monde ambiant" as the cause of change. He
was cautious in drawing conclusions, and did not believe that existing
species are now undergoing modification; and, as his son adds, "C'est
donc un probleme a reserver entierement a l'avenir, suppose meme que
l'avenir doive avoir prise sur lui."

In 1813 Dr. W.C. Wells read before the Royal Society "An Account of a
White Female, part of whose skin resembles that of a Negro"; but his
paper was not published until his famous "Two Essays upon Dew and Single
Vision" appeared in 1818. In this paper he distinctly recognises the
principle of natural selection, and this is the first recognition which
has been indicated; but he applies it only to the races of man, and to
certain characters alone. After remarking that negroes and mulattoes
enjoy an immunity from certain tropical diseases, he observes, firstly,
that all animals tend to vary in some degree, and, secondly, that
agriculturists improve their domesticated animals by selection; and
then, he adds, but what is done in this latter case "by art, seems to
be done with equal efficacy, though more slowly, by nature, in the
formation of varieties of mankind, fitted for the country which they
inhabit. Of the accidental varieties of man, which would occur among
the first few and scattered inhabitants of the middle regions of Africa,
some one would be better fitted than others to bear the diseases of the
country. This race would consequently multiply, while the others would
decrease; not only from their in ability to sustain the attacks of
disease, but from their incapacity of contending with their more
vigorous neighbours. The colour of this vigorous race I take for
granted, from what has been already said, would be dark. But the same
disposition to form varieties still existing, a darker and a darker race
would in the course of time occur: and as the darkest would be the best
fitted for the climate, this would at length become the most prevalent,
if not the only race, in the particular country in which it had
originated." He then extends these same views to the white inhabitants
of colder climates. I am indebted to Mr. Rowley, of the United States,
for having called my attention, through Mr. Brace, to the above passage
of Dr. Wells' work.

The Hon. and Rev. W. Herbert, afterward Dean of Manchester, in the
fourth volume of the "Horticultural Transactions", 1822, and in his
work on the "Amaryllidaceae" (1837, pages 19, 339), declares that
"horticultural experiments have established, beyond the possibility of
refutation, that botanical species are only a higher and more permanent
class of varieties." He extends the same view to animals. The dean
believes that single species of each genus were created in an originally
highly plastic condition, and that these have produced, chiefly by
inter-crossing, but likewise by variation, all our existing species.

In 1826 Professor Grant, in the concluding paragraph in his well-known
paper ("Edinburgh Philosophical Journal", vol. XIV, page 283) on the
Spongilla, clearly declares his belief that species are descended
from other species, and that they become improved in the course of
modification. This same view was given in his Fifty-fifth Lecture,
published in the "Lancet" in 1834.

In 1831 Mr. Patrick Matthew published his work on "Naval Timber and
Arboriculture", in which he gives precisely the same view on the origin
of species as that (presently to be alluded to) propounded by Mr.
Wallace and myself in the "Linnean Journal", and as that enlarged in
the present volume. Unfortunately the view was given by Mr. Matthew very
briefly in scattered passages in an appendix to a work on a different
subject, so that it remained unnoticed until Mr. Matthew himself drew
attention to it in the "Gardeners' Chronicle", on April 7, 1860. The
differences of Mr. Matthew's views from mine are not of much importance:
he seems to consider that the world was nearly depopulated at successive
periods, and then restocked; and he gives as an alternative, that new
forms may be generated "without the presence of any mold or germ of
former aggregates." I am not sure that I understand some passages; but
it seems that he attributes much influence to the direct action of
the conditions of life. He clearly saw, however, the full force of the
principle of natural selection.

The celebrated geologist and naturalist, Von Buch, in his excellent
"Description Physique des Isles Canaries" (1836, page 147), clearly
expresses his belief that varieties slowly become changed into permanent
species, which are no longer capable of intercrossing.

Rafinesque, in his "New Flora of North America", published in 1836,
wrote (page 6) as follows: "All species might have been varieties once,
and many varieties are gradually becoming species by assuming constant
and peculiar characters;" but further on (page 18) he adds, "except the
original types or ancestors of the genus."

In 1843-44 Professor Haldeman ("Boston Journal of Nat. Hist. U. States",
vol. iv, page 468) has ably given the arguments for and against the
hypothesis of the development and modification of species: he seems to
lean toward the side of change.

The "Vestiges of Creation" appeared in 1844. In the tenth and much
improved edition (1853) the anonymous author says (page 155): "The
proposition determined on after much consideration is, that the several
series of animated beings, from the simplest and oldest up to the
highest and most recent, are, under the providence of God, the results,
FIRST, of an impulse which has been imparted to the forms of life,
advancing them, in definite times, by generation, through grades of
organisation terminating in the highest dicotyledons and vertebrata,
these grades being few in number, and generally marked by intervals
of organic character, which we find to be a practical difficulty in
ascertaining affinities; SECOND, of another impulse connected with the
vital forces, tending, in the course of generations, to modify organic
structures in accordance with external circumstances, as food, the
nature of the habitat, and the meteoric agencies, these being the
'adaptations' of the natural theologian." The author apparently believes
that organisation progresses by sudden leaps, but that the effects
produced by the conditions of life are gradual. He argues with much
force on general grounds that species are not immutable productions.
But I cannot see how the two supposed "impulses" account in a scientific
sense for the numerous and beautiful coadaptations which we see
throughout nature; I cannot see that we thus gain any insight how, for
instance, a woodpecker has become adapted to its peculiar habits of
life. The work, from its powerful and brilliant style, though displaying
in the early editions little accurate knowledge and a great want of
scientific caution, immediately had a very wide circulation. In my
opinion it has done excellent service in this country in calling
attention to the subject, in removing prejudice, and in thus preparing
the ground for the reception of analogous views.

In 1846 the veteran geologist M.J. d'Omalius d'Halloy published in an
excellent though short paper ("Bulletins de l'Acad. Roy. Bruxelles",
tom. xiii, page 581) his opinion that it is more probable that new
species have been produced by descent with modification than that they
have been separately created: the author first promulgated this opinion
in 1831.

Professor Owen, in 1849 ("Nature of Limbs", page 86), wrote as follows:
"The archetypal idea was manifested in the flesh under diverse such
modifications, upon this planet, long prior to the existence of those
animal species that actually exemplify it. To what natural laws or
secondary causes the orderly succession and progression of such organic
phenomena may have been committed, we, as yet, are ignorant." In his
address to the British Association, in 1858, he speaks (page li) of "the
axiom of the continuous operation of creative power, or of the ordained
becoming of living things." Further on (page xc), after referring
to geographical distribution, he adds, "These phenomena shake our
confidence in the conclusion that the Apteryx of New Zealand and the
Red Grouse of England were distinct creations in and for those islands
respectively. Always, also, it may be well to bear in mind that by the
word 'creation' the zoologist means 'a process he knows not what.'" He
amplifies this idea by adding that when such cases as that of the Red
Grouse are "enumerated by the zoologist as evidence of distinct creation
of the bird in and for such islands, he chiefly expresses that he
knows not how the Red Grouse came to be there, and there exclusively;
signifying also, by this mode of expressing such ignorance, his belief
that both the bird and the islands owed their origin to a great first
Creative Cause." If we interpret these sentences given in the same
address, one by the other, it appears that this eminent philosopher felt
in 1858 his confidence shaken that the Apteryx and the Red Grouse first
appeared in their respective homes "he knew not how," or by some process
"he knew not what."

This address was delivered after the papers by Mr. Wallace and myself on
the Origin of Species, presently to be referred to, had been read before
the Linnean Society. When the first edition of this work was published,
I was so completely deceived, as were many others, by such expressions
as "the continuous operation of creative power," that I included
Professor Owen with other palaeontologists as being firmly convinced
of the immutability of species; but it appears ("Anat. of Vertebrates",
vol. iii, page 796) that this was on my part a preposterous error. In
the last edition of this work I inferred, and the inference still seems
to me perfectly just, from a passage beginning with the words "no doubt
the type-form," etc.(Ibid., vol. i, page xxxv), that Professor Owen
admitted that natural selection may have done something in the formation
of a new species; but this it appears (Ibid., vol. iii. page 798)
is inaccurate and without evidence. I also gave some extracts from a
correspondence between Professor Owen and the editor of the "London
Review", from which it appeared manifest to the editor as well as to
myself, that Professor Owen claimed to have promulgated the theory of
natural selection before I had done so; and I expressed my surprise
and satisfaction at this announcement; but as far as it is possible to
understand certain recently published passages (Ibid., vol. iii. page
798) I have either partially or wholly again fallen into error. It
is consolatory to me that others find Professor Owen's controversial
writings as difficult to understand and to reconcile with each other,
as I do. As far as the mere enunciation of the principle of natural
selection is concerned, it is quite immaterial whether or not Professor
Owen preceded me, for both of us, as shown in this historical sketch,
were long ago preceded by Dr. Wells and Mr. Matthews.

M. Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, in his lectures delivered in 1850 (of
which a Resume appeared in the "Revue et Mag. de Zoolog.", Jan., 1851),
briefly gives his reason for believing that specific characters "sont
fixes, pour chaque espece, tant qu'elle se perpetue au milieu des memes
circonstances: ils se modifient, si les circonstances ambiantes viennent
a changer. En resume, L'OBSERVATION des animaux sauvages demontre deja
la variabilite LIMITEE des especes. Les EXPERIENCES sur les animaux
sauvages devenus domestiques, et sur les animaux domestiques redevenus
sauvages, la demontrent plus clairment encore. Ces memes experiences
prouvent, de plus, que les differences produites peuvent etre de VALEUR
GENERIQUE." In his "Hist. Nat. Generale" (tom. ii, page 430, 1859) he
amplifies analogous conclusions.

From a circular lately issued it appears that Dr. Freke, in 1851
("Dublin Medical Press", page 322), propounded the doctrine that all
organic beings have descended from one primordial form. His grounds of
belief and treatment of the subject are wholly different from mine;
but as Dr. Freke has now (1861) published his Essay on the "Origin of
Species by means of Organic Affinity", the difficult attempt to give any
idea of his views would be superfluous on my part.

Mr. Herbert Spencer, in an Essay (originally published in the "Leader",
March, 1852, and republished in his "Essays", in 1858), has contrasted
the theories of the Creation and the Development of organic beings
with remarkable skill and force. He argues from the analogy of domestic
productions, from the changes which the embryos of many species undergo,
from the difficulty of distinguishing species and varieties, and from
the principle of general gradation, that species have been modified;
and he attributes the modification to the change of circumstances.
The author (1855) has also treated Psychology on the principle of the
necessary acquirement of each mental power and capacity by gradation.

In 1852 M. Naudin, a distinguished botanist, expressly stated, in an
admirable paper on the Origin of Species ("Revue Horticole", page 102;
since partly republished in the "Nouvelles Archives du Museum", tom. i,
page 171), his belief that species are formed in an analogous manner as
varieties are under cultivation; and the latter process he attributes to
man's power of selection. But he does not show how selection acts under
nature. He believes, like Dean Herbert, that species, when nascent,
were more plastic than at present. He lays weight on what he calls the
principle of finality, "puissance mysterieuse, indeterminee; fatalite
pour les uns; pour les autres volonte providentielle, dont l'action
incessante sur les etres vivantes determine, a toutes les epoques de
l'existence du monde, la forme, le volume, et la duree de chacun d'eux,
en raison de sa destinee dans l'ordre de choses dont il fait partie.
C'est cette puissance qui harmonise chaque membre a l'ensemble, en
l'appropriant a la fonction qu'il doit remplir dans l'organisme general
de la nature, fonction qui est pour lui sa raison d'etre." (From
references in Bronn's "Untersuchungen uber die Entwickelungs-Gesetze",
it appears that the celebrated botanist and palaeontologist Unger
published, in 1852, his belief that species undergo development and
modification. Dalton, likewise, in Pander and Dalton's work on Fossil
Sloths, expressed, in 1821, a similar belief. Similar views have, as is
well known, been maintained by Oken in his mystical "Natur-Philosophie".
From other references in Godron's work "Sur l'Espece", it seems that
Bory St. Vincent, Burdach, Poiret and Fries, have all admitted that
new species are continually being produced. I may add, that of the
thirty-four authors named in this Historical Sketch, who believe in
the modification of species, or at least disbelieve in separate acts
of creation, twenty-seven have written on special branches of natural
history or geology.)

In 1853 a celebrated geologist, Count Keyserling ("Bulletin de la Soc.
Geolog.", 2nd Ser., tom. x, page 357), suggested that as new diseases,
supposed to have been caused by some miasma have arisen and spread over
the world, so at certain periods the germs of existing species may have
been chemically affected by circumambient molecules of a particular
nature, and thus have given rise to new forms.

In this same year, 1853, Dr. Schaaffhausen published an excellent
pamphlet ("Verhand. des Naturhist. Vereins der Preuss. Rheinlands",
etc.), in which he maintains the development of organic forms on the
earth. He infers that many species have kept true for long periods,
whereas a few have become modified. The distinction of species he
explains by the destruction of intermediate graduated forms. "Thus
living plants and animals are not separated from the extinct by new
creations, but are to be regarded as their descendants through continued
reproduction."

A well-known French botanist, M. Lecoq, writes in 1854 ("Etudes sur
Geograph." Bot. tom. i, page 250), "On voit que nos recherches sur la
fixite ou la variation de l'espece, nous conduisent directement aux
idees emises par deux hommes justement celebres, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire
et Goethe." Some other passages scattered through M. Lecoq's large
work make it a little doubtful how far he extends his views on the
modification of species.

The "Philosophy of Creation" has been treated in a masterly manner by
the Rev. Baden Powell, in his "Essays on the Unity of Worlds", 1855.
Nothing can be more striking than the manner in which he shows that the
introduction of new species is "a regular, not a casual phenomenon," or,
as Sir John Herschel expresses it, "a natural in contradistinction to a
miraculous process."

The third volume of the "Journal of the Linnean Society" contains
papers, read July 1, 1858, by Mr. Wallace and myself, in which, as
stated in the introductory remarks to this volume, the theory of
Natural Selection is promulgated by Mr. Wallace with admirable force and
clearness.

Von Baer, toward whom all zoologists feel so profound a respect,
expressed about the year 1859 (see Prof. Rudolph Wagner,
"Zoologisch-Anthropologische Untersuchungen", 1861, s. 51) his
conviction, chiefly grounded on the laws of geographical distribution,
that forms now perfectly distinct have descended from a single
parent-form.

In June, 1859, Professor Huxley gave a lecture before the Royal
Institution on the "Persistent Types of Animal Life". Referring to such
cases, he remarks, "It is difficult to comprehend the meaning of such
facts as these, if we suppose that each species of animal and plant, or
each great type of organisation, was formed and placed upon the surface
of the globe at long intervals by a distinct act of creative power; and
it is well to recollect that such an assumption is as unsupported by
tradition or revelation as it is opposed to the general analogy of
nature. If, on the other hand, we view "Persistent Types" in relation to
that hypothesis which supposes the species living at any time to be the
result of the gradual modification of pre-existing species, a hypothesis
which, though unproven, and sadly damaged by some of its supporters,
is yet the only one to which physiology lends any countenance; their
existence would seem to show that the amount of modification which
living beings have undergone during geological time is but very small in
relation to the whole series of changes which they have suffered."

In December, 1859, Dr. Hooker published his "Introduction to the
Australian Flora". In the first part of this great work he admits the
truth of the descent and modification of species, and supports this
doctrine by many original observations.

The first edition of this work was published on November 24, 1859, and
the second edition on January 7, 1860.



CONTENTS.


  INTRODUCTION


  CHAPTER I.

  VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION.

  Causes of Variability--Effects of Habit and the use or disuse of
  Parts--Correlated Variation--Inheritance--Character of Domestic
  Varieties--Difficulty of distinguishing between Varieties and
  Species--Origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more Species--Domestic
  Pigeons, their Differences and Origin--Principles of Selection,
  anciently followed, their Effects--Methodical and Unconscious
  Selection--Unknown Origin of our Domestic Productions--Circumstances
  favourable to Man's power of Selection.


  CHAPTER II.

  VARIATION UNDER NATURE.

  Variability--Individual Differences--Doubtful species--Wide ranging,
  much diffused, and common species, vary most--Species of the larger
  genera in each country vary more frequently than the species of the
  smaller genera--Many of the species of the larger genera resemble
  varieties in being very closely, but unequally, related to each other,
  and in having restricted ranges.


  CHAPTER III.

  STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE.

  Its bearing on natural selection--The term used in a wide
  sense--Geometrical ratio of increase--Rapid increase of naturalised
  animals and plants--Nature of the checks to increase--Competition
  universal--Effects of climate--Protection from the number of
  individuals--Complex relations of all animals and plants throughout
  nature--Struggle for life most severe between individuals and varieties
  of the same species; often severe between species of the same genus--The
  relation of organism to organism the most important of all relations.


  CHAPTER IV.

  NATURAL SELECTION; OR THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST.

  Natural Selection--its power compared with man's selection--its power
  on characters of trifling importance--its power at all ages and on
  both sexes--Sexual Selection--On the generality of intercrosses
  between individuals of the same species--Circumstances favourable and
  unfavourable to the results of Natural Selection, namely, intercrossing,
  isolation, number of individuals--Slow action--Extinction caused by
  Natural Selection--Divergence of Character, related to the diversity of
  inhabitants of any small area and to naturalisation--Action of Natural
  Selection, through Divergence of Character and Extinction, on the
  descendants from a common parent--Explains the Grouping of all organic
  beings--Advance in organisation--Low forms preserved--Convergence of
  character--Indefinite multiplication of species--Summary.


  CHAPTER V.

  LAWS OF VARIATION.

  Effects of changed conditions--Use and disuse, combined with natural
  selection; organs of flight and of vision--Acclimatisation--Correlated
  variation--Compensation and economy of growth--False
  correlations--Multiple, rudimentary, and lowly organised structures
  variable--Parts developed in an unusual manner are highly variable;
  specific characters more variable than generic; secondary sexual
  characters variable--Species of the same genus vary in an analogous
  manner--Reversions to long-lost characters--Summary.


  CHAPTER VI.

  DIFFICULTIES OF THE THEORY.

  Difficulties of the theory of descent with modification--Absence
  or rarity of transitional varieties--Transitions in habits of
  life--Diversified habits in the same species--Species with habits
  widely different from those of their allies--Organs of extreme
  perfection--Modes of transition--Cases of difficulty--Natura non facit
  saltum--Organs of small importance--Organs not in all cases absolutely
  perfect--The law of Unity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence
  embraced by the theory of Natural Selection.


  CHAPTER VII.

  MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTIONS TO THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION.

  Longevity--Modifications not necessarily simultaneous--Modifications
  apparently of no direct service--Progressive development--Characters of
  small functional importance, the most constant--Supposed incompetence
  of natural selection to account for the incipient stages of useful
  structures--Causes which interfere with the acquisition through natural
  selection of useful structures--Gradations of structure with changed
  functions--Widely different organs in members of the same class,
  developed from one and the same source--Reasons for disbelieving in
  great and abrupt modifications.


  CHAPTER VIII.

  INSTINCT.

  Instincts comparable with habits, but different in their
  origin--Instincts graduated--Aphides and ants--Instincts
  variable--Domestic instincts, their origin--Natural instincts of
  the cuckoo, molothrus, ostrich, and parasitic bees--Slave-making
  ants--Hive-bee, its cell-making instinct--Changes of instinct and
  structure not necessarily simultaneous--Difficulties on the theory of
  the Natural Selection of instincts--Neuter or sterile insects--Summary.


  CHAPTER IX.

  HYBRIDISM.

  Distinction between the sterility of first crosses and of
  hybrids--Sterility various in degree, not universal, affected by close
  interbreeding, removed by domestication--Laws governing the sterility
  of hybrids--Sterility not a special endowment, but incidental on
  other differences, not accumulated by natural selection--Causes of
  the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids--Parallelism between the
  effects of changed conditions of life and of crossing--Dimorphism and
  Trimorphism--Fertility of varieties when crossed and of their mongrel
  offspring not universal--Hybrids and mongrels compared independently of
  their fertility--Summary.


  CHAPTER X.

  ON THE IMPERFECTION OF THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD.

  On the absence of intermediate varieties at the present day--On the
  nature of extinct intermediate varieties; on their number--On the lapse
  of time, as inferred from the rate of denudation and of deposition--On
  the lapse of time as estimated in years--On the poorness of our
  palaeontological collections--On the intermittence of geological
  formations--On the denudation of granitic areas--On the absence of
  intermediate varieties in any one formation--On the sudden appearance
  of groups of species--On their sudden appearance in the lowest known
  fossiliferous strata--Antiquity of the habitable earth.


  CHAPTER XI.

  ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS.

  On the slow and successive appearance of new species--On their different
  rates of change--Species once lost do not reappear--Groups of species
  follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as
  do single species--On extinction--On simultaneous changes in the forms
  of life throughout the world--On the affinities of extinct species to
  each other and to living species--On the state of development of
  ancient forms--On the succession of the same types within the same
  areas--Summary of preceding and present chapter.


  CHAPTER XII.

  GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.

  Present distribution cannot be accounted for by differences in physical
  conditions--Importance of barriers--Affinity of the productions of the
  same continent--Centres of creation--Means of dispersal by changes of
  climate and of the level of the land, and by occasional means--Dispersal
  during the Glacial period--Alternate Glacial periods in the north and
  south.


  CHAPTER XIII.

  GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION--CONTINUED.

  Distribution of fresh-water productions--On the inhabitants of oceanic
  islands--Absence of Batrachians and of terrestrial Mammals--On
  the relation of the inhabitants of islands to those of the nearest
  mainland--On colonisation from the nearest source with subsequent
  modification--Summary of the last and present chapter.


  CHAPTER XIV.

  MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS: MORPHOLOGY--EMBRYOLOGY--RUDIMENTARY
  ORGANS.

  Classification, groups subordinate to groups--Natural system--Rules and
  difficulties in classification, explained on the theory of descent
  with modification--Classification of varieties--Descent always used in
  classification--Analogical or adaptive characters--Affinities,
  general, complex and radiating--Extinction separates and defines
  groups--Morphology, between members of the same class, between parts of
  the same individual--Embryology, laws of, explained by variations not
  supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding
  age--Rudimentary Organs; their origin explained--Summary.


  CHAPTER XV.

  RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION.

  Recapitulation of the objections to the theory of Natural
  Selection--Recapitulation of the general and special circumstances
  in its favour--Causes of the general belief in the immutability
  of species--How far the theory of Natural Selection may be
  extended--Effects of its adoption on the study of Natural
  history--Concluding remarks.


  GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS.


  INDEX.




ORIGIN OF SPECIES.




INTRODUCTION.

When on board H.M.S. Beagle, as naturalist, I was much struck with
certain facts in the distribution of the organic beings inhabiting South
America, and in the geological relations of the present to the past
inhabitants of that continent. These facts, as will be seen in the
latter chapters of this volume, seemed to throw some light on the origin
of species--that mystery of mysteries, as it has been called by one
of our greatest philosophers. On my return home, it occurred to me,
in 1837, that something might perhaps be made out on this question by
patiently accumulating and reflecting on all sorts of facts which could
possibly have any bearing on it. After five years' work I allowed myself
to speculate on the subject, and drew up some short notes; these I
enlarged in 1844 into a sketch of the conclusions, which then seemed to
me probable: from that period to the present day I have steadily pursued
the same object. I hope that I may be excused for entering on these
personal details, as I give them to show that I have not been hasty in
coming to a decision.

My work is now (1859) nearly finished; but as it will take me many more
years to complete it, and as my health is far from strong, I have been
urged to publish this abstract. I have more especially been induced to
do this, as Mr. Wallace, who is now studying the natural history of
the Malay Archipelago, has arrived at almost exactly the same general
conclusions that I have on the origin of species. In 1858 he sent me a
memoir on this subject, with a request that I would forward it to Sir
Charles Lyell, who sent it to the Linnean Society, and it is published
in the third volume of the Journal of that Society. Sir C. Lyell and Dr.
Hooker, who both knew of my work--the latter having read my sketch
of 1844--honoured me by thinking it advisable to publish, with Mr.
Wallace's excellent memoir, some brief extracts from my manuscripts.

This abstract, which I now publish, must necessarily be imperfect. I
cannot here give references and authorities for my several statements;
and I must trust to the reader reposing some confidence in my accuracy.
No doubt errors may have crept in, though I hope I have always been
cautious in trusting to good authorities alone. I can here give only
the general conclusions at which I have arrived, with a few facts in
illustration, but which, I hope, in most cases will suffice. No one can
feel more sensible than I do of the necessity of hereafter publishing in
detail all the facts, with references, on which my conclusions have been
grounded; and I hope in a future work to do this. For I am well aware
that scarcely a single point is discussed in this volume on which facts
cannot be adduced, often apparently leading to conclusions directly
opposite to those at which I have arrived. A fair result can be obtained
only by fully stating and balancing the facts and arguments on both
sides of each question; and this is here impossible.

I much regret that want of space prevents my having the satisfaction of
acknowledging the generous assistance which I have received from very
many naturalists, some of them personally unknown to me. I cannot,
however, let this opportunity pass without expressing my deep
obligations to Dr. Hooker, who, for the last fifteen years, has aided me
in every possible way by his large stores of knowledge and his excellent
judgment.

In considering the origin of species, it is quite conceivable that a
naturalist, reflecting on the mutual affinities of organic beings,
on their embryological relations, their geographical distribution,
geological succession, and other such facts, might come to the
conclusion that species had not been independently created, but had
descended, like varieties, from other species. Nevertheless, such a
conclusion, even if well founded, would be unsatisfactory, until it
could be shown how the innumerable species, inhabiting this world
have been modified, so as to acquire that perfection of structure
and coadaptation which justly excites our admiration. Naturalists
continually refer to external conditions, such as climate, food, etc.,
as the only possible cause of variation. In one limited sense, as
we shall hereafter see, this may be true; but it is preposterous to
attribute to mere external conditions, the structure, for instance,
of the woodpecker, with its feet, tail, beak, and tongue, so admirably
adapted to catch insects under the bark of trees. In the case of the
mistletoe, which draws its nourishment from certain trees, which has
seeds that must be transported by certain birds, and which has flowers
with separate sexes absolutely requiring the agency of certain insects
to bring pollen from one flower to the other, it is equally preposterous
to account for the structure of this parasite, with its relations to
several distinct organic beings, by the effects of external conditions,
or of habit, or of the volition of the plant itself.

It is, therefore, of the highest importance to gain a clear insight into
the means of modification and coadaptation. At the commencement of
my observations it seemed to me probable that a careful study of
domesticated animals and of cultivated plants would offer the best
chance of making out this obscure problem. Nor have I been disappointed;
in this and in all other perplexing cases I have invariably found that
our knowledge, imperfect though it be, of variation under domestication,
afforded the best and safest clue. I may venture to express my
conviction of the high value of such studies, although they have been
very commonly neglected by naturalists.

From these considerations, I shall devote the first chapter of this
abstract to variation under domestication. We shall thus see that a
large amount of hereditary modification is at least possible; and, what
is equally or more important, we shall see how great is the power of man
in accumulating by his selection successive slight variations. I will
then pass on to the variability of species in a state of nature; but
I shall, unfortunately, be compelled to treat this subject far too
briefly, as it can be treated properly only by giving long catalogues of
facts. We shall, however, be enabled to discuss what circumstances
are most favourable to variation. In the next chapter the struggle
for existence among all organic beings throughout the world, which
inevitably follows from the high geometrical ratio of their increase,
will be considered. This is the doctrine of Malthus, applied to the
whole animal and vegetable kingdoms. As many more individuals of each
species are born than can possibly survive; and as, consequently, there
is a frequently recurring struggle for existence, it follows that any
being, if it vary however slightly in any manner profitable to itself,
under the complex and sometimes varying conditions of life, will have
a better chance of surviving, and thus be NATURALLY SELECTED. From
the strong principle of inheritance, any selected variety will tend to
propagate its new and modified form.

This fundamental subject of natural selection will be treated at
some length in the fourth chapter; and we shall then see how natural
selection almost inevitably causes much extinction of the less improved
forms of life, and leads to what I have called divergence of character.
In the next chapter I shall discuss the complex and little known laws
of variation. In the five succeeding chapters, the most apparent and
gravest difficulties in accepting the theory will be given: namely,
first, the difficulties of transitions, or how a simple being or a
simple organ can be changed and perfected into a highly developed
being or into an elaborately constructed organ; secondly the subject of
instinct, or the mental powers of animals; thirdly, hybridism, or the
infertility of species and the fertility of varieties when intercrossed;
and fourthly, the imperfection of the geological record. In the next
chapter I shall consider the geological succession of organic beings
throughout time; in the twelfth and thirteenth, their geographical
distribution throughout space; in the fourteenth, their classification
or mutual affinities, both when mature and in an embryonic condition. In
the last chapter I shall give a brief recapitulation of the whole work,
and a few concluding remarks.

No one ought to feel surprise at much remaining as yet unexplained in
regard to the origin of species and varieties, if he make due allowance
for our profound ignorance in regard to the mutual relations of the
many beings which live around us. Who can explain why one species ranges
widely and is very numerous, and why another allied species has a narrow
range and is rare? Yet these relations are of the highest importance,
for they determine the present welfare and, as I believe, the future
success and modification of every inhabitant of this world. Still less
do we know of the mutual relations of the innumerable inhabitants of the
world during the many past geological epochs in its history. Although
much remains obscure, and will long remain obscure, I can entertain no
doubt, after the most deliberate study and dispassionate judgment of
which I am capable, that the view which most naturalists until recently
entertained, and which I formerly entertained--namely, that each species
has been independently created--is erroneous. I am fully convinced that
species are not immutable; but that those belonging to what are called
the same genera are lineal descendants of some other and generally
extinct species, in the same manner as the acknowledged varieties of
any one species are the descendants of that species. Furthermore, I am
convinced that natural selection has been the most important, but not
the exclusive, means of modification.




CHAPTER I. VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION.

 Causes of Variability--Effects of Habit and the use and disuse of
 Parts--Correlated Variation--Inheritance--Character of Domestic
 Varieties--Difficulty of distinguishing between Varieties and
 Species--Origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more Species--Domestic
 Pigeons, their Differences and Origin--Principles of Selection,
 anciently followed, their Effects--Methodical and Unconscious
 Selection--Unknown Origin of our Domestic Productions--Circumstances
 favourable to Man's power of Selection.


CAUSES OF VARIABILITY.

When we compare the individuals of the same variety or sub-variety of
our older cultivated plants and animals, one of the first points which
strikes us is, that they generally differ more from each other than do
the individuals of any one species or variety in a state of nature. And
if we reflect on the vast diversity of the plants and animals which have
been cultivated, and which have varied during all ages under the most
different climates and treatment, we are driven to conclude that this
great variability is due to our domestic productions having been raised
under conditions of life not so uniform as, and somewhat different from,
those to which the parent species had been exposed under nature. There
is, also, some probability in the view propounded by Andrew Knight, that
this variability may be partly connected with excess of food. It seems
clear that organic beings must be exposed during several generations to
new conditions to cause any great amount of variation; and that, when
the organisation has once begun to vary, it generally continues varying
for many generations. No case is on record of a variable organism
ceasing to vary under cultivation. Our oldest cultivated plants, such
as wheat, still yield new varieties: our oldest domesticated animals are
still capable of rapid improvement or modification.

As far as I am able to judge, after long attending to the subject, the
conditions of life appear to act in two ways--directly on the whole
organisation or on certain parts alone and in directly by affecting the
reproductive system. With respect to the direct action, we must bear in
mind that in every case, as Professor Weismann has lately insisted,
and as I have incidently shown in my work on "Variation under
Domestication," there are two factors: namely, the nature of the
organism and the nature of the conditions. The former seems to be much
the more important; for nearly similar variations sometimes arise under,
as far as we can judge, dissimilar conditions; and, on the other hand,
dissimilar variations arise under conditions which appear to be
nearly uniform. The effects on the offspring are either definite or in
definite. They may be considered as definite when all or nearly all the
offspring of individuals exposed to certain conditions during several
generations are modified in the same manner. It is extremely difficult
to come to any conclusion in regard to the extent of the changes which
have been thus definitely induced. There can, however, be little doubt
about many slight changes, such as size from the amount of food,
colour from the nature of the food, thickness of the skin and hair from
climate, etc. Each of the endless variations which we see in the plumage
of our fowls must have had some efficient cause; and if the same cause
were to act uniformly during a long series of generations on many
individuals, all probably would be modified in the same manner. Such
facts as the complex and extraordinary out growths which variably
follow from the insertion of a minute drop of poison by a gall-producing
insect, shows us what singular modifications might result in the case of
plants from a chemical change in the nature of the sap.

In definite variability is a much more common result of changed
conditions than definite variability, and has probably played a more
important part in the formation of our domestic races. We see in
definite variability in the endless slight peculiarities which
distinguish the individuals of the same species, and which cannot be
accounted for by inheritance from either parent or from some more remote
ancestor. Even strongly-marked differences occasionally appear in the
young of the same litter, and in seedlings from the same seed-capsule.
At long intervals of time, out of millions of individuals reared in the
same country and fed on nearly the same food, deviations of structure so
strongly pronounced as to deserve to be called monstrosities arise; but
monstrosities cannot be separated by any distinct line from slighter
variations. All such changes of structure, whether extremely slight or
strongly marked, which appear among many individuals living together,
may be considered as the in definite effects of the conditions of life
on each individual organism, in nearly the same manner as the chill
effects different men in an in definite manner, according to their
state of body or constitution, causing coughs or colds, rheumatism, or
inflammation of various organs.

With respect to what I have called the in direct action of changed
conditions, namely, through the reproductive system of being affected,
we may infer that variability is thus induced, partly from the fact of
this system being extremely sensitive to any change in the conditions,
and partly from the similarity, as Kolreuter and others have remarked,
between the variability which follows from the crossing of distinct
species, and that which may be observed with plants and animals when
reared under new or unnatural conditions. Many facts clearly show how
eminently susceptible the reproductive system is to very slight changes
in the surrounding conditions. Nothing is more easy than to tame an
animal, and few things more difficult than to get it to breed freely
under confinement, even when the male and female unite. How many animals
there are which will not breed, though kept in an almost free state in
their native country! This is generally, but erroneously attributed to
vitiated instincts. Many cultivated plants display the utmost vigour,
and yet rarely or never seed! In some few cases it has been discovered
that a very trifling change, such as a little more or less water at some
particular period of growth, will determine whether or not a plant will
produce seeds. I cannot here give the details which I have collected and
elsewhere published on this curious subject; but to show how singular
the laws are which determine the reproduction of animals under
confinement, I may mention that carnivorous animals, even from the
tropics, breed in this country pretty freely under confinement, with
the exception of the plantigrades or bear family, which seldom produce
young; whereas, carnivorous birds, with the rarest exception, hardly
ever lay fertile eggs. Many exotic plants have pollen utterly worthless,
in the same condition as in the most sterile hybrids. When, on the one
hand, we see domesticated animals and plants, though often weak and
sickly, breeding freely under confinement; and when, on the other hand,
we see individuals, though taken young from a state of nature perfectly
tamed, long-lived, and healthy (of which I could give numerous
instances), yet having their reproductive system so seriously affected
by unperceived causes as to fail to act, we need not be surprised at
this system, when it does act under confinement, acting irregularly,
and producing offspring somewhat unlike their parents. I may add that
as some organisms breed freely under the most unnatural conditions--for
instance, rabbits and ferrets kept in hutches--showing that their
reproductive organs are not easily affected; so will some animals
and plants withstand domestication or cultivation, and vary very
slightly--perhaps hardly more than in a state of nature.

Some naturalists have maintained that all variations are connected with
the act of sexual reproduction; but this is certainly an error; for I
have given in another work a long list of "sporting plants;" as they are
called by gardeners; that is, of plants which have suddenly produced a
single bud with a new and sometimes widely different character from that
of the other buds on the same plant. These bud variations, as they may
be named, can be propagated by grafts, offsets, etc., and sometimes
by seed. They occur rarely under nature, but are far from rare under
culture. As a single bud out of many thousands produced year after year
on the same tree under uniform conditions, has been known suddenly to
assume a new character; and as buds on distinct trees, growing
under different conditions, have sometimes yielded nearly the same
variety--for instance, buds on peach-trees producing nectarines, and
buds on common roses producing moss-roses--we clearly see that the
nature of the conditions is of subordinate importance in comparison
with the nature of the organism in determining each particular form of
variation; perhaps of not more importance than the nature of the spark,
by which a mass of combustible matter is ignited, has in determining the
nature of the flames.

EFFECTS OF HABIT AND OF THE USE OR DISUSE OF PARTS; CORRELATED
VARIATION; INHERITANCE.

Changed habits produce an inherited effect as in the period of the
flowering of plants when transported from one climate to another. With
animals the increased use or disuse of parts has had a more marked
influence; thus I find in the domestic duck that the bones of the wing
weigh less and the bones of the leg more, in proportion to the whole
skeleton, than do the same bones in the wild duck; and this change may
be safely attributed to the domestic duck flying much less, and walking
more, than its wild parents. The great and inherited development of the
udders in cows and goats in countries where they are habitually milked,
in comparison with these organs in other countries, is probably another
instance of the effects of use. Not one of our domestic animals can be
named which has not in some country drooping ears; and the view which
has been suggested that the drooping is due to disuse of the muscles of
the ear, from the animals being seldom much alarmed, seems probable.

Many laws regulate variation, some few of which can be dimly seen, and
will hereafter be briefly discussed. I will here only allude to what may
be called correlated variation. Important changes in the embryo or larva
will probably entail changes in the mature animal. In monstrosities,
the correlations between quite distinct parts are very curious; and many
instances are given in Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire's great work on this
subject. Breeders believe that long limbs are almost always accompanied
by an elongated head. Some instances of correlation are quite whimsical;
thus cats which are entirely white and have blue eyes are generally
deaf; but it has been lately stated by Mr. Tait that this is confined to
the males. Colour and constitutional peculiarities go together, of which
many remarkable cases could be given among animals and plants. From
facts collected by Heusinger, it appears that white sheep and pigs
are injured by certain plants, while dark-coloured individuals escape:
Professor Wyman has recently communicated to me a good illustration of
this fact; on asking some farmers in Virginia how it was that all their
pigs were black, they informed him that the pigs ate the paint-root
(Lachnanthes), which coloured their bones pink, and which caused
the hoofs of all but the black varieties to drop off; and one of the
"crackers" (i.e. Virginia squatters) added, "we select the black members
of a litter for raising, as they alone have a good chance of living."
Hairless dogs have imperfect teeth; long-haired and coarse-haired
animals are apt to have, as is asserted, long or many horns; pigeons
with feathered feet have skin between their outer toes; pigeons with
short beaks have small feet, and those with long beaks large feet. Hence
if man goes on selecting, and thus augmenting, any peculiarity, he will
almost certainly modify unintentionally other parts of the structure,
owing to the mysterious laws of correlation.

The results of the various, unknown, or but dimly understood laws of
variation are infinitely complex and diversified. It is well worth while
carefully to study the several treatises on some of our old cultivated
plants, as on the hyacinth, potato, even the dahlia, etc.; and it
is really surprising to note the endless points of structure and
constitution in which the varieties and sub-varieties differ slightly
from each other. The whole organisation seems to have become plastic,
and departs in a slight degree from that of the parental type.

Any variation which is not inherited is unimportant for us. But the
number and diversity of inheritable deviations of structure, both
those of slight and those of considerable physiological importance,
are endless. Dr. Prosper Lucas' treatise, in two large volumes, is the
fullest and the best on this subject. No breeder doubts how strong is
the tendency to inheritance; that like produces like is his fundamental
belief: doubts have been thrown on this principle only by theoretical
writers. When any deviation of structure often appears, and we see it
in the father and child, we cannot tell whether it may not be due to the
same cause having acted on both; but when among individuals, apparently
exposed to the same conditions, any very rare deviation, due to some
extraordinary combination of circumstances, appears in the parent--say,
once among several million individuals--and it reappears in the
child, the mere doctrine of chances almost compels us to attribute
its reappearance to inheritance. Every one must have heard of cases of
albinism, prickly skin, hairy bodies, etc., appearing in several members
of the same family. If strange and rare deviations of structure are
truly inherited, less strange and commoner deviations may be freely
admitted to be inheritable. Perhaps the correct way of viewing the whole
subject would be, to look at the inheritance of every character whatever
as the rule, and non-inheritance as the anomaly.

The laws governing inheritance are for the most part unknown; no one
can say why the same peculiarity in different individuals of the same
species, or in different species, is sometimes inherited and sometimes
not so; why the child often reverts in certain characteristics to its
grandfather or grandmother or more remote ancestor; why a peculiarity is
often transmitted from one sex to both sexes, or to one sex alone,
more commonly but not exclusively to the like sex. It is a fact of
some importance to us, that peculiarities appearing in the males of our
domestic breeds are often transmitted, either exclusively or in a much
greater degree, to the males alone. A much more important rule, which I
think may be trusted, is that, at whatever period of life a peculiarity
first appears, it tends to reappear in the offspring at a corresponding
age, though sometimes earlier. In many cases this could not be
otherwise; thus the inherited peculiarities in the horns of cattle could
appear only in the offspring when nearly mature; peculiarities in the
silk-worm are known to appear at the corresponding caterpillar or cocoon
stage. But hereditary diseases and some other facts make me believe
that the rule has a wider extension, and that, when there is no apparent
reason why a peculiarity should appear at any particular age, yet that
it does tend to appear in the offspring at the same period at which it
first appeared in the parent. I believe this rule to be of the highest
importance in explaining the laws of embryology. These remarks are of
course confined to the first APPEARANCE of the peculiarity, and not
to the primary cause which may have acted on the ovules or on the male
element; in nearly the same manner as the increased length of the horns
in the offspring from a short-horned cow by a long-horned bull, though
appearing late in life, is clearly due to the male element.

Having alluded to the subject of reversion, I may here refer to
a statement often made by naturalists--namely, that our domestic
varieties, when run wild, gradually but invariably revert in character
to their aboriginal stocks. Hence it has been argued that no deductions
can be drawn from domestic races to species in a state of nature. I
have in vain endeavoured to discover on what decisive facts the above
statement has so often and so boldly been made. There would be great
difficulty in proving its truth: we may safely conclude that very many
of the most strongly marked domestic varieties could not possibly live
in a wild state. In many cases we do not know what the aboriginal stock
was, and so could not tell whether or not nearly perfect reversion
had ensued. It would be necessary, in order to prevent the effects of
intercrossing, that only a single variety should be turned loose in
its new home. Nevertheless, as our varieties certainly do occasionally
revert in some of their characters to ancestral forms, it seems to me
not improbable that if we could succeed in naturalising, or were to
cultivate, during many generations, the several races, for instance,
of the cabbage, in very poor soil--in which case, however, some
effect would have to be attributed to the DEFINITE action of the poor
soil--that they would, to a large extent, or even wholly, revert to the
wild aboriginal stock. Whether or not the experiment would succeed is
not of great importance for our line of argument; for by the experiment
itself the conditions of life are changed. If it could be shown that our
domestic varieties manifested a strong tendency to reversion--that is,
to lose their acquired characters, while kept under the same conditions
and while kept in a considerable body, so that free intercrossing might
check, by blending together, any slight deviations in their structure,
in such case, I grant that we could deduce nothing from domestic
varieties in regard to species. But there is not a shadow of evidence
in favour of this view: to assert that we could not breed our cart
and race-horses, long and short-horned cattle, and poultry of various
breeds, and esculent vegetables, for an unlimited number of generations,
would be opposed to all experience.

CHARACTER OF DOMESTIC VARIETIES; DIFFICULTY OF DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN
VARIETIES AND SPECIES; ORIGIN OF DOMESTIC VARIETIES FROM ONE OR MORE
SPECIES.

When we look to the hereditary varieties or races of our domestic
animals and plants, and compare them with closely allied species, we
generally perceive in each domestic race, as already remarked, less
uniformity of character than in true species. Domestic races often
have a somewhat monstrous character; by which I mean, that, although
differing from each other and from other species of the same genus, in
several trifling respects, they often differ in an extreme degree in
some one part, both when compared one with another, and more especially
when compared with the species under nature to which they are nearest
allied. With these exceptions (and with that of the perfect fertility of
varieties when crossed--a subject hereafter to be discussed), domestic
races of the same species differ from each other in the same manner as
do the closely allied species of the same genus in a state of nature,
but the differences in most cases are less in degree. This must be
admitted as true, for the domestic races of many animals and plants have
been ranked by some competent judges as the descendants of aboriginally
distinct species, and by other competent judges as mere varieties.
If any well marked distinction existed between a domestic race and a
species, this source of doubt would not so perpetually recur. It has
often been stated that domestic races do not differ from each other in
characters of generic value. It can be shown that this statement is not
correct; but naturalists differ much in determining what characters are
of generic value; all such valuations being at present empirical. When
it is explained how genera originate under nature, it will be seen that
we have no right to expect often to find a generic amount of difference
in our domesticated races.

In attempting to estimate the amount of structural difference between
allied domestic races, we are soon involved in doubt, from not knowing
whether they are descended from one or several parent species. This
point, if it could be cleared up, would be interesting; if, for
instance, it could be shown that the greyhound, bloodhound, terrier,
spaniel and bull-dog, which we all know propagate their kind truly, were
the offspring of any single species, then such facts would have great
weight in making us doubt about the immutability of the many closely
allied natural species--for instance, of the many foxes--inhabiting the
different quarters of the world. I do not believe, as we shall presently
see, that the whole amount of difference between the several breeds of
the dog has been produced under domestication; I believe that a small
part of the difference is due to their being descended from distinct
species. In the case of strongly marked races of some other domesticated
species, there is presumptive or even strong evidence that all are
descended from a single wild stock.

It has often been assumed that man has chosen for domestication animals
and plants having an extraordinary inherent tendency to vary, and
likewise to withstand diverse climates. I do not dispute that these
capacities have added largely to the value of most of our domesticated
productions; but how could a savage possibly know, when he first tamed
an animal, whether it would vary in succeeding generations, and whether
it would endure other climates? Has the little variability of the ass
and goose, or the small power of endurance of warmth by the reindeer,
or of cold by the common camel, prevented their domestication? I
cannot doubt that if other animals and plants, equal in number to our
domesticated productions, and belonging to equally diverse classes and
countries, were taken from a state of nature, and could be made to breed
for an equal number of generations under domestication, they would on
an average vary as largely as the parent species of our existing
domesticated productions have varied.

In the case of most of our anciently domesticated animals and plants,
it is not possible to come to any definite conclusion, whether they are
descended from one or several wild species. The argument mainly relied
on by those who believe in the multiple origin of our domestic animals
is, that we find in the most ancient times, on the monuments of Egypt,
and in the lake-habitations of Switzerland, much diversity in the
breeds; and that some of these ancient breeds closely resemble, or are
even identical with, those still existing. But this only throws far
backward the history of civilisation, and shows that animals were
domesticated at a much earlier period than has hitherto been supposed.
The lake-inhabitants of Switzerland cultivated several kinds of wheat
and barley, the pea, the poppy for oil and flax; and they possessed
several domesticated animals. They also carried on commerce with other
nations. All this clearly shows, as Heer has remarked, that they had at
this early age progressed considerably in civilisation; and this again
implies a long continued previous period of less advanced civilisation,
during which the domesticated animals, kept by different tribes in
different districts, might have varied and given rise to distinct races.
Since the discovery of flint tools in the superficial formations of many
parts of the world, all geologists believe that barbarian men existed at
an enormously remote period; and we know that at the present day there
is hardly a tribe so barbarous as not to have domesticated at least the
dog.

The origin of most of our domestic animals will probably forever remain
vague. But I may here state that, looking to the domestic dogs of the
whole world, I have, after a laborious collection of all known facts,
come to the conclusion that several wild species of Canidae have been
tamed, and that their blood, in some cases mingled together, flows in
the veins of our domestic breeds. In regard to sheep and goats I can
form no decided opinion. From facts communicated to me by Mr. Blyth,
on the habits, voice, constitution and structure of the humped Indian
cattle, it is almost certain that they are descended from a different
aboriginal stock from our European cattle; and some competent judges
believe that these latter have had two or three wild progenitors,
whether or not these deserve to be called species. This conclusion, as
well as that of the specific distinction between the humped and common
cattle, may, indeed, be looked upon as established by the admirable
researches of Professor Rutimeyer. With respect to horses, from reasons
which I cannot here give, I am doubtfully inclined to believe, in
opposition to several authors, that all the races belong to the same
species. Having kept nearly all the English breeds of the fowl alive,
having bred and crossed them, and examined their skeletons, it appears
to me almost certain that all are the descendants of the wild Indian
fowl, Gallus bankiva; and this is the conclusion of Mr. Blyth, and
of others who have studied this bird in India. In regard to ducks and
rabbits, some breeds of which differ much from each other, the evidence
is clear that they are all descended from the common duck and wild
rabbit.

The doctrine of the origin of our several domestic races from several
aboriginal stocks, has been carried to an absurd extreme by some
authors. They believe that every race which breeds true, let the
distinctive characters be ever so slight, has had its wild prototype.
At this rate there must have existed at least a score of species of wild
cattle, as many sheep, and several goats, in Europe alone, and several
even within Great Britain. One author believes that there formerly
existed eleven wild species of sheep peculiar to Great Britain! When we
bear in mind that Britain has now not one peculiar mammal, and France
but few distinct from those of Germany, and so with Hungary, Spain,
etc., but that each of these kingdoms possesses several peculiar breeds
of cattle, sheep, etc., we must admit that many domestic breeds must
have originated in Europe; for whence otherwise could they have been
derived? So it is in India. Even in the case of the breeds of the
domestic dog throughout the world, which I admit are descended from
several wild species, it cannot be doubted that there has been an
immense amount of inherited variation; for who will believe that animals
closely resembling the Italian greyhound, the bloodhound, the bull-dog,
pug-dog, or Blenheim spaniel, etc.--so unlike all wild Canidae--ever
existed in a state of nature? It has often been loosely said that all
our races of dogs have been produced by the crossing of a few
aboriginal species; but by crossing we can only get forms in some degree
intermediate between their parents; and if we account for our several
domestic races by this process, we must admit the former existence of
the most extreme forms, as the Italian greyhound, bloodhound, bull-dog,
etc., in the wild state. Moreover, the possibility of making distinct
races by crossing has been greatly exaggerated. Many cases are on record
showing that a race may be modified by occasional crosses if aided
by the careful selection of the individuals which present the desired
character; but to obtain a race intermediate between two quite distinct
races would be very difficult. Sir J. Sebright expressly experimented
with this object and failed. The offspring from the first cross between
two pure breeds is tolerably and sometimes (as I have found with
pigeons) quite uniform in character, and every thing seems simple
enough; but when these mongrels are crossed one with another for several
generations, hardly two of them are alike, and then the difficulty of
the task becomes manifest.

BREEDS OF THE DOMESTIC PIGEON, THEIR DIFFERENCES AND ORIGIN.

Believing that it is always best to study some special group, I have,
after deliberation, taken up domestic pigeons. I have kept every breed
which I could purchase or obtain, and have been most kindly favoured
with skins from several quarters of the world, more especially by the
Hon. W. Elliot from India, and by the Hon. C. Murray from Persia. Many
treatises in different languages have been published on pigeons, and
some of them are very important, as being of considerable antiquity. I
have associated with several eminent fanciers, and have been permitted
to join two of the London Pigeon Clubs. The diversity of the breeds is
something astonishing. Compare the English carrier and the short-faced
tumbler, and see the wonderful difference in their beaks, entailing
corresponding differences in their skulls. The carrier, more especially
the male bird, is also remarkable from the wonderful development of the
carunculated skin about the head, and this is accompanied by greatly
elongated eyelids, very large external orifices to the nostrils, and a
wide gape of mouth. The short-faced tumbler has a beak in outline almost
like that of a finch; and the common tumbler has the singular inherited
habit of flying at a great height in a compact flock, and tumbling in
the air head over heels. The runt is a bird of great size, with long,
massive beak and large feet; some of the sub-breeds of runts have very
long necks, others very long wings and tails, others singularly short
tails. The barb is allied to the carrier, but, instead of a long beak,
has a very short and broad one. The pouter has a much elongated body,
wings, and legs; and its enormously developed crop, which it glories in
inflating, may well excite astonishment and even laughter. The turbit
has a short and conical beak, with a line of reversed feathers down the
breast; and it has the habit of continually expanding, slightly, the
upper part of the oesophagus. The Jacobin has the feathers so much
reversed along the back of the neck that they form a hood, and it
has, proportionally to its size, elongated wing and tail feathers. The
trumpeter and laugher, as their names express, utter a very different
coo from the other breeds. The fantail has thirty or even forty
tail-feathers, instead of twelve or fourteen, the normal number in all
the members of the great pigeon family: these feathers are kept expanded
and are carried so erect that in good birds the head and tail touch: the
oil-gland is quite aborted. Several other less distinct breeds might be
specified.

In the skeletons of the several breeds, the development of the bones of
the face, in length and breadth and curvature, differs enormously. The
shape, as well as the breadth and length of the ramus of the lower jaw,
varies in a highly remarkable manner. The caudal and sacral vertebrae
vary in number; as does the number of the ribs, together with their
relative breadth and the presence of processes. The size and shape of
the apertures in the sternum are highly variable; so is the degree
of divergence and relative size of the two arms of the furcula. The
proportional width of the gape of mouth, the proportional length of the
eyelids, of the orifice of the nostrils, of the tongue (not always in
strict correlation with the length of beak), the size of the crop and
of the upper part of the oesophagus; the development and abortion of
the oil-gland; the number of the primary wing and caudal feathers; the
relative length of the wing and tail to each other and to the body;
the relative length of the leg and foot; the number of scutellae on
the toes, the development of skin between the toes, are all points of
structure which are variable. The period at which the perfect plumage is
acquired varies, as does the state of the down with which the nestling
birds are clothed when hatched. The shape and size of the eggs vary. The
manner of flight, and in some breeds the voice and disposition, differ
remarkably. Lastly, in certain breeds, the males and females have come
to differ in a slight degree from each other.

Altogether at least a score of pigeons might be chosen, which, if shown
to an ornithologist, and he were told that they were wild birds, would
certainly be ranked by him as well-defined species. Moreover, I do not
believe that any ornithologist would in this case place the English
carrier, the short-faced tumbler, the runt, the barb, pouter, and
fantail in the same genus; more especially as in each of these breeds
several truly-inherited sub-breeds, or species, as he would call them,
could be shown him.

Great as are the differences between the breeds of the pigeon, I am
fully convinced that the common opinion of naturalists is correct,
namely, that all are descended from the rock-pigeon (Columba livia),
including under this term several geographical races or sub-species,
which differ from each other in the most trifling respects. As several
of the reasons which have led me to this belief are in some degree
applicable in other cases, I will here briefly give them. If the several
breeds are not varieties, and have not proceeded from the rock-pigeon,
they must have descended from at least seven or eight aboriginal stocks;
for it is impossible to make the present domestic breeds by the crossing
of any lesser number: how, for instance, could a pouter be produced
by crossing two breeds unless one of the parent-stocks possessed the
characteristic enormous crop? The supposed aboriginal stocks must all
have been rock-pigeons, that is, they did not breed or willingly perch
on trees. But besides C. livia, with its geographical sub-species, only
two or three other species of rock-pigeons are known; and these have
not any of the characters of the domestic breeds. Hence the supposed
aboriginal stocks must either still exist in the countries where they
were originally domesticated, and yet be unknown to ornithologists; and
this, considering their size, habits and remarkable characters, seems
improbable; or they must have become extinct in the wild state. But
birds breeding on precipices, and good flyers, are unlikely to be
exterminated; and the common rock-pigeon, which has the same habits with
the domestic breeds, has not been exterminated even on several of the
smaller British islets, or on the shores of the Mediterranean. Hence the
supposed extermination of so many species having similar habits with
the rock-pigeon seems a very rash assumption. Moreover, the several
above-named domesticated breeds have been transported to all parts of
the world, and, therefore, some of them must have been carried back
again into their native country; but not one has become wild or feral,
though the dovecot-pigeon, which is the rock-pigeon in a very slightly
altered state, has become feral in several places. Again, all recent
experience shows that it is difficult to get wild animals to breed
freely under domestication; yet on the hypothesis of the multiple origin
of our pigeons, it must be assumed that at least seven or eight species
were so thoroughly domesticated in ancient times by half-civilized man,
as to be quite prolific under confinement.

An argument of great weight, and applicable in several other cases, is,
that the above-specified breeds, though agreeing generally with the wild
rock-pigeon in constitution, habits, voice, colouring, and in most parts
of their structure, yet are certainly highly abnormal in other parts; we
may look in vain through the whole great family of Columbidae for a beak
like that of the English carrier, or that of the short-faced tumbler, or
barb; for reversed feathers like those of the Jacobin; for a crop like
that of the pouter; for tail-feathers like those of the fantail. Hence
it must be assumed, not only that half-civilized man succeeded in
thoroughly domesticating several species, but that he intentionally or
by chance picked out extraordinarily abnormal species; and further, that
these very species have since all become extinct or unknown. So many
strange contingencies are improbable in the highest degree.

Some facts in regard to the colouring of pigeons well deserve
consideration. The rock-pigeon is of a slaty-blue, with white loins;
but the Indian sub-species, C. intermedia of Strickland, has this
part bluish. The tail has a terminal dark bar, with the outer feathers
externally edged at the base with white. The wings have two black bars.
Some semi-domestic breeds, and some truly wild breeds, have, besides the
two black bars, the wings chequered with black. These several marks do
not occur together in any other species of the whole family. Now, in
every one of the domestic breeds, taking thoroughly well-bred birds, all
the above marks, even to the white edging of the outer tail-feathers,
sometimes concur perfectly developed. Moreover, when birds belonging to
two or more distinct breeds are crossed, none of which are blue or have
any of the above-specified marks, the mongrel offspring are very apt
suddenly to acquire these characters. To give one instance out of
several which I have observed: I crossed some white fantails, which
breed very true, with some black barbs--and it so happens that blue
varieties of barbs are so rare that I never heard of an instance in
England; and the mongrels were black, brown and mottled. I also crossed
a barb with a spot, which is a white bird with a red tail and red spot
on the forehead, and which notoriously breeds very true; the mongrels
were dusky and mottled. I then crossed one of the mongrel barb-fantails
with a mongrel barb-spot, and they produced a bird of as beautiful a
blue colour, with the white loins, double black wing-bar, and barred and
white-edged tail-feathers, as any wild rock-pigeon! We can understand
these facts, on the well-known principle of reversion to ancestral
characters, if all the domestic breeds are descended from the
rock-pigeon. But if we deny this, we must make one of the two following
highly improbable suppositions. Either, first, that all the several
imagined aboriginal stocks were coloured and marked like the
rock-pigeon, although no other existing species is thus coloured and
marked, so that in each separate breed there might be a tendency to
revert to the very same colours and markings. Or, secondly, that each
breed, even the purest, has within a dozen, or at most within a score,
of generations, been crossed by the rock-pigeon: I say within a dozen
or twenty generations, for no instance is known of crossed descendants
reverting to an ancestor of foreign blood, removed by a greater number
of generations. In a breed which has been crossed only once the tendency
to revert to any character derived from such a cross will naturally
become less and less, as in each succeeding generation there will be
less of the foreign blood; but when there has been no cross, and there
is a tendency in the breed to revert to a character which was lost
during some former generation, this tendency, for all that we can see to
the contrary, may be transmitted undiminished for an indefinite
number of generations. These two distinct cases of reversion are often
confounded together by those who have written on inheritance.

Lastly, the hybrids or mongrels from between all the breeds of the
pigeon are perfectly fertile, as I can state from my own observations,
purposely made, on the most distinct breeds. Now, hardly any cases
have been ascertained with certainty of hybrids from two quite distinct
species of animals being perfectly fertile. Some authors believe
that long-continued domestication eliminates this strong tendency to
sterility in species. From the history of the dog, and of some other
domestic animals, this conclusion is probably quite correct, if applied
to species closely related to each other. But to extend it so far as to
suppose that species, aboriginally as distinct as carriers, tumblers,
pouters, and fantails now are, should yield offspring perfectly fertile,
inter se, seems to me rash in the extreme.

From these several reasons, namely, the improbability of man having
formerly made seven or eight supposed species of pigeons to breed freely
under domestication--these supposed species being quite unknown in a
wild state, and their not having become anywhere feral--these species
presenting certain very abnormal characters, as compared with all other
Columbidae, though so like the rock-pigeon in most other respects--the
occasional reappearance of the blue colour and various black marks in
all the breeds, both when kept pure and when crossed--and lastly, the
mongrel offspring being perfectly fertile--from these several reasons,
taken together, we may safely conclude that all our domestic breeds are
descended from the rock-pigeon or Columba livia with its geographical
sub-species.

In favour of this view, I may add, firstly, that the wild C. livia has
been found capable of domestication in Europe and in India; and that it
agrees in habits and in a great number of points of structure with all
the domestic breeds. Secondly, that although an English carrier or a
short-faced tumbler differs immensely in certain characters from the
rock-pigeon, yet that by comparing the several sub-breeds of these two
races, more especially those brought from distant countries, we can
make, between them and the rock-pigeon, an almost perfect series; so
we can in some other cases, but not with all the breeds. Thirdly,
those characters which are mainly distinctive of each breed are in each
eminently variable, for instance, the wattle and length of beak of
the carrier, the shortness of that of the tumbler, and the number of
tail-feathers in the fantail; and the explanation of this fact will be
obvious when we treat of selection. Fourthly, pigeons have been watched
and tended with the utmost care, and loved by many people. They have
been domesticated for thousands of years in several quarters of the
world; the earliest known record of pigeons is in the fifth Aegyptian
dynasty, about 3000 B.C., as was pointed out to me by Professor Lepsius;
but Mr. Birch informs me that pigeons are given in a bill of fare in
the previous dynasty. In the time of the Romans, as we hear from Pliny,
immense prices were given for pigeons; "nay, they are come to this pass,
that they can reckon up their pedigree and race." Pigeons were much
valued by Akber Khan in India, about the year 1600; never less than
20,000 pigeons were taken with the court. "The monarchs of Iran and
Turan sent him some very rare birds;" and, continues the courtly
historian, "His Majesty, by crossing the breeds, which method was never
practised before, has improved them astonishingly." About this same
period the Dutch were as eager about pigeons as were the old Romans. The
paramount importance of these considerations in explaining the immense
amount of variation which pigeons have undergone, will likewise be
obvious when we treat of selection. We shall then, also, see how it is
that the several breeds so often have a somewhat monstrous character.
It is also a most favourable circumstance for the production of distinct
breeds, that male and female pigeons can be easily mated for life; and
thus different breeds can be kept together in the same aviary.

I have discussed the probable origin of domestic pigeons at some,
yet quite insufficient, length; because when I first kept pigeons and
watched the several kinds, well knowing how truly they breed, I
felt fully as much difficulty in believing that since they had been
domesticated they had all proceeded from a common parent, as any
naturalist could in coming to a similar conclusion in regard to the
many species of finches, or other groups of birds, in nature. One
circumstance has struck me much; namely, that nearly all the breeders of
the various domestic animals and the cultivators of plants, with whom
I have conversed, or whose treatises I have read, are firmly convinced
that the several breeds to which each has attended, are descended
from so many aboriginally distinct species. Ask, as I have asked, a
celebrated raiser of Hereford cattle, whether his cattle might not have
descended from Long-horns, or both from a common parent-stock, and he
will laugh you to scorn. I have never met a pigeon, or poultry, or duck,
or rabbit fancier, who was not fully convinced that each main breed was
descended from a distinct species. Van Mons, in his treatise on pears
and apples, shows how utterly he disbelieves that the several sorts,
for instance a Ribston-pippin or Codlin-apple, could ever have proceeded
from the seeds of the same tree. Innumerable other examples could be
given. The explanation, I think, is simple: from long-continued study
they are strongly impressed with the differences between the several
races; and though they well know that each race varies slightly, for
they win their prizes by selecting such slight differences, yet they
ignore all general arguments, and refuse to sum up in their minds slight
differences accumulated during many successive generations. May not
those naturalists who, knowing far less of the laws of inheritance than
does the breeder, and knowing no more than he does of the intermediate
links in the long lines of descent, yet admit that many of our domestic
races are descended from the same parents--may they not learn a lesson
of caution, when they deride the idea of species in a state of nature
being lineal descendants of other species?

PRINCIPLES OF SELECTION ANCIENTLY FOLLOWED, AND THEIR EFFECTS.

Let us now briefly consider the steps by which domestic races have been
produced, either from one or from several allied species. Some effect
may be attributed to the direct and definite action of the external
conditions of life, and some to habit; but he would be a bold man who
would account by such agencies for the differences between a dray and
race-horse, a greyhound and bloodhound, a carrier and tumbler pigeon.
One of the most remarkable features in our domesticated races is that we
see in them adaptation, not indeed to the animal's or plant's own good,
but to man's use or fancy. Some variations useful to him have probably
arisen suddenly, or by one step; many botanists, for instance, believe
that the fuller's teasel, with its hooks, which can not be rivalled by
any mechanical contrivance, is only a variety of the wild Dipsacus; and
this amount of change may have suddenly arisen in a seedling. So it has
probably been with the turnspit dog; and this is known to have been
the case with the ancon sheep. But when we compare the dray-horse and
race-horse, the dromedary and camel, the various breeds of sheep fitted
either for cultivated land or mountain pasture, with the wool of one
breed good for one purpose, and that of another breed for another
purpose; when we compare the many breeds of dogs, each good for man
in different ways; when we compare the game-cock, so pertinacious in
battle, with other breeds so little quarrelsome, with "everlasting
layers" which never desire to sit, and with the bantam so small and
elegant; when we compare the host of agricultural, culinary, orchard,
and flower-garden races of plants, most useful to man at different
seasons and for different purposes, or so beautiful in his eyes, we
must, I think, look further than to mere variability. We can not suppose
that all the breeds were suddenly produced as perfect and as useful as
we now see them; indeed, in many cases, we know that this has not been
their history. The key is man's power of accumulative selection: nature
gives successive variations; man adds them up in certain directions
useful to him. In this sense he may be said to have made for himself
useful breeds.

The great power of this principle of selection is not hypothetical.
It is certain that several of our eminent breeders have, even within a
single lifetime, modified to a large extent their breeds of cattle
and sheep. In order fully to realise what they have done it is almost
necessary to read several of the many treatises devoted to this subject,
and to inspect the animals. Breeders habitually speak of an animal's
organisation as something plastic, which they can model almost as they
please. If I had space I could quote numerous passages to this effect
from highly competent authorities. Youatt, who was probably better
acquainted with the works of agriculturalists than almost any other
individual, and who was himself a very good judge of animals, speaks of
the principle of selection as "that which enables the agriculturist, not
only to modify the character of his flock, but to change it altogether.
It is the magician's wand, by means of which he may summon into life
whatever form and mould he pleases." Lord Somerville, speaking of
what breeders have done for sheep, says: "It would seem as if they had
chalked out upon a wall a form perfect in itself, and then had given it
existence." In Saxony the importance of the principle of selection in
regard to merino sheep is so fully recognised, that men follow it as a
trade: the sheep are placed on a table and are studied, like a picture
by a connoisseur; this is done three times at intervals of months, and
the sheep are each time marked and classed, so that the very best may
ultimately be selected for breeding.

What English breeders have actually effected is proved by the enormous
prices given for animals with a good pedigree; and these have been
exported to almost every quarter of the world. The improvement is by no
means generally due to crossing different breeds; all the best breeders
are strongly opposed to this practice, except sometimes among closely
allied sub-breeds. And when a cross has been made, the closest selection
is far more indispensable even than in ordinary cases. If selection
consisted merely in separating some very distinct variety and breeding
from it, the principle would be so obvious as hardly to be worth
notice; but its importance consists in the great effect produced by
the accumulation in one direction, during successive generations, of
differences absolutely inappreciable by an uneducated eye--differences
which I for one have vainly attempted to appreciate. Not one man in
a thousand has accuracy of eye and judgment sufficient to become an
eminent breeder. If gifted with these qualities, and he studies his
subject for years, and devotes his lifetime to it with indomitable
perseverance, he will succeed, and may make great improvements; if he
wants any of these qualities, he will assuredly fail. Few would readily
believe in the natural capacity and years of practice requisite to
become even a skilful pigeon-fancier.

The same principles are followed by horticulturists; but the variations
are here often more abrupt. No one supposes that our choicest
productions have been produced by a single variation from the aboriginal
stock. We have proofs that this is not so in several cases in which
exact records have been kept; thus, to give a very trifling instance,
the steadily increasing size of the common gooseberry may be quoted.
We see an astonishing improvement in many florists' flowers, when the
flowers of the present day are compared with drawings made only
twenty or thirty years ago. When a race of plants is once pretty well
established, the seed-raisers do not pick out the best plants, but
merely go over their seed-beds, and pull up the "rogues," as they call
the plants that deviate from the proper standard. With animals this kind
of selection is, in fact, likewise followed; for hardly any one is so
careless as to breed from his worst animals.

In regard to plants, there is another means of observing the accumulated
effects of selection--namely, by comparing the diversity of flowers in
the different varieties of the same species in the flower-garden; the
diversity of leaves, pods, or tubers, or whatever part is valued, in the
kitchen-garden, in comparison with the flowers of the same varieties;
and the diversity of fruit of the same species in the orchard, in
comparison with the leaves and flowers of the same set of varieties. See
how different the leaves of the cabbage are, and how extremely alike the
flowers; how unlike the flowers of the heartsease are, and how alike the
leaves; how much the fruit of the different kinds of gooseberries differ
in size, colour, shape, and hairiness, and yet the flowers present very
slight differences. It is not that the varieties which differ largely
in some one point do not differ at all in other points; this is hardly
ever--I speak after careful observation--perhaps never, the case. The
law of correlated variation, the importance of which should never be
overlooked, will ensure some differences; but, as a general rule, it
cannot be doubted that the continued selection of slight variations,
either in the leaves, the flowers, or the fruit, will produce races
differing from each other chiefly in these characters.

It may be objected that the principle of selection has been reduced to
methodical practice for scarcely more than three-quarters of a century;
it has certainly been more attended to of late years, and many treatises
have been published on the subject; and the result has been, in a
corresponding degree, rapid and important. But it is very far from
true that the principle is a modern discovery. I could give several
references to works of high antiquity, in which the full importance of
the principle is acknowledged. In rude and barbarous periods of English
history choice animals were often imported, and laws were passed to
prevent their exportation: the destruction of horses under a certain
size was ordered, and this may be compared to the "roguing" of plants
by nurserymen. The principle of selection I find distinctly given in an
ancient Chinese encyclopaedia. Explicit rules are laid down by some of
the Roman classical writers. From passages in Genesis, it is clear that
the colour of domestic animals was at that early period attended to.
Savages now sometimes cross their dogs with wild canine animals, to
improve the breed, and they formerly did so, as is attested by passages
in Pliny. The savages in South Africa match their draught cattle by
colour, as do some of the Esquimaux their teams of dogs. Livingstone
states that good domestic breeds are highly valued by the negroes in the
interior of Africa who have not associated with Europeans. Some of these
facts do not show actual selection, but they show that the breeding of
domestic animals was carefully attended to in ancient times, and is now
attended to by the lowest savages. It would, indeed, have been a strange
fact, had attention not been paid to breeding, for the inheritance of
good and bad qualities is so obvious.

UNCONSCIOUS SELECTION.

At the present time, eminent breeders try by methodical selection, with
a distinct object in view, to make a new strain or sub-breed, superior
to anything of the kind in the country. But, for our purpose, a form of
selection, which may be called unconscious, and which results from every
one trying to possess and breed from the best individual animals, is
more important. Thus, a man who intends keeping pointers naturally tries
to get as good dogs as he can, and afterwards breeds from his own best
dogs, but he has no wish or expectation of permanently altering the
breed. Nevertheless we may infer that this process, continued during
centuries, would improve and modify any breed, in the same way as
Bakewell, Collins, etc., by this very same process, only carried on more
methodically, did greatly modify, even during their lifetimes, the forms
and qualities of their cattle. Slow and insensible changes of this kind
could never be recognised unless actual measurements or careful drawings
of the breeds in question have been made long ago, which may serve for
comparison. In some cases, however, unchanged, or but little changed,
individuals of the same breed exist in less civilised districts, where
the breed has been less improved. There is reason to believe that King
Charles' spaniel has been unconsciously modified to a large extent
since the time of that monarch. Some highly competent authorities are
convinced that the setter is directly derived from the spaniel, and
has probably been slowly altered from it. It is known that the English
pointer has been greatly changed within the last century, and in this
case the change has, it is believed, been chiefly effected by crosses
with the foxhound; but what concerns us is, that the change has been
effected unconsciously and gradually, and yet so effectually that,
though the old Spanish pointer certainly came from Spain, Mr. Borrow
has not seen, as I am informed by him, any native dog in Spain like our
pointer.

By a similar process of selection, and by careful training, English
race-horses have come to surpass in fleetness and size the parent Arabs,
so that the latter, by the regulations for the Goodwood Races, are
favoured in the weights which they carry. Lord Spencer and others have
shown how the cattle of England have increased in weight and in early
maturity, compared with the stock formerly kept in this country. By
comparing the accounts given in various old treatises of the former
and present state of carrier and tumbler pigeons in Britain, India,
and Persia, we can trace the stages through which they have insensibly
passed, and come to differ so greatly from the rock-pigeon.

Youatt gives an excellent illustration of the effects of a course of
selection which may be considered as unconscious, in so far that the
breeders could never have expected, or even wished, to produce the
result which ensued--namely, the production of the distinct strains. The
two flocks of Leicester sheep kept by Mr. Buckley and Mr. Burgess, as
Mr. Youatt remarks, "Have been purely bred from the original stock
of Mr. Bakewell for upwards of fifty years. There is not a suspicion
existing in the mind of any one at all acquainted with the subject that
the owner of either of them has deviated in any one instance from the
pure blood of Mr. Bakewell's flock, and yet the difference between the
sheep possessed by these two gentlemen is so great that they have the
appearance of being quite different varieties."

If there exist savages so barbarous as never to think of the inherited
character of the offspring of their domestic animals, yet any one animal
particularly useful to them, for any special purpose, would be carefully
preserved during famines and other accidents, to which savages are
so liable, and such choice animals would thus generally leave more
offspring than the inferior ones; so that in this case there would be a
kind of unconscious selection going on. We see the value set on animals
even by the barbarians of Tierra del Fuego, by their killing and
devouring their old women, in times of dearth, as of less value than
their dogs.

In plants the same gradual process of improvement through the occasional
preservation of the best individuals, whether or not sufficiently
distinct to be ranked at their first appearance as distinct varieties,
and whether or not two or more species or races have become blended
together by crossing, may plainly be recognised in the increased size
and beauty which we now see in the varieties of the heartsease, rose,
pelargonium, dahlia, and other plants, when compared with the older
varieties or with their parent-stocks. No one would ever expect to get
a first-rate heartsease or dahlia from the seed of a wild plant. No one
would expect to raise a first-rate melting pear from the seed of a wild
pear, though he might succeed from a poor seedling growing wild, if it
had come from a garden-stock. The pear, though cultivated in classical
times, appears, from Pliny's description, to have been a fruit of very
inferior quality. I have seen great surprise expressed in horticultural
works at the wonderful skill of gardeners in having produced such
splendid results from such poor materials; but the art has been simple,
and, as far as the final result is concerned, has been followed almost
unconsciously. It has consisted in always cultivating the best known
variety, sowing its seeds, and, when a slightly better variety chanced
to appear, selecting it, and so onwards. But the gardeners of the
classical period, who cultivated the best pears which they could
procure, never thought what splendid fruit we should eat; though we
owe our excellent fruit in some small degree to their having naturally
chosen and preserved the best varieties they could anywhere find.

A large amount of change, thus slowly and unconsciously accumulated,
explains, as I believe, the well-known fact, that in a number of cases
we cannot recognise, and therefore do not know, the wild parent-stocks
of the plants which have been longest cultivated in our flower and
kitchen gardens. If it has taken centuries or thousands of years to
improve or modify most of our plants up to their present standard of
usefulness to man, we can understand how it is that neither Australia,
the Cape of Good Hope, nor any other region inhabited by quite
uncivilised man, has afforded us a single plant worth culture. It is
not that these countries, so rich in species, do not by a strange chance
possess the aboriginal stocks of any useful plants, but that the native
plants have not been improved by continued selection up to a standard
of perfection comparable with that acquired by the plants in countries
anciently civilised.

In regard to the domestic animals kept by uncivilised man, it should
not be overlooked that they almost always have to struggle for their
own food, at least during certain seasons. And in two countries very
differently circumstanced, individuals of the same species, having
slightly different constitutions or structure, would often succeed
better in the one country than in the other, and thus by a process of
"natural selection," as will hereafter be more fully explained, two
sub-breeds might be formed. This, perhaps, partly explains why the
varieties kept by savages, as has been remarked by some authors,
have more of the character of true species than the varieties kept in
civilised countries.

On the view here given of the important part which selection by man has
played, it becomes at once obvious, how it is that our domestic races
show adaptation in their structure or in their habits to man's wants
or fancies. We can, I think, further understand the frequently abnormal
character of our domestic races, and likewise their differences being so
great in external characters, and relatively so slight in internal parts
or organs. Man can hardly select, or only with much difficulty, any
deviation of structure excepting such as is externally visible; and
indeed he rarely cares for what is internal. He can never act by
selection, excepting on variations which are first given to him in some
slight degree by nature. No man would ever try to make a fantail till he
saw a pigeon with a tail developed in some slight degree in an unusual
manner, or a pouter till he saw a pigeon with a crop of somewhat unusual
size; and the more abnormal or unusual any character was when it first
appeared, the more likely it would be to catch his attention. But to use
such an expression as trying to make a fantail is, I have no doubt, in
most cases, utterly incorrect. The man who first selected a pigeon
with a slightly larger tail, never dreamed what the descendants of
that pigeon would become through long-continued, partly unconscious and
partly methodical, selection. Perhaps the parent bird of all fantails
had only fourteen tail-feathers somewhat expanded, like the present Java
fantail, or like individuals of other and distinct breeds, in which as
many as seventeen tail-feathers have been counted. Perhaps the first
pouter-pigeon did not inflate its crop much more than the turbit now
does the upper part of its oesophagus--a habit which is disregarded by
all fanciers, as it is not one of the points of the breed.

Nor let it be thought that some great deviation of structure would
be necessary to catch the fancier's eye: he perceives extremely small
differences, and it is in human nature to value any novelty, however
slight, in one's own possession. Nor must the value which would formerly
have been set on any slight differences in the individuals of the same
species, be judged of by the value which is now set on them, after
several breeds have fairly been established. It is known that with
pigeons many slight variations now occasionally appear, but these are
rejected as faults or deviations from the standard of perfection in
each breed. The common goose has not given rise to any marked varieties;
hence the Toulouse and the common breed, which differ only in colour,
that most fleeting of characters, have lately been exhibited as distinct
at our poultry-shows.

These views appear to explain what has sometimes been noticed, namely,
that we know hardly anything about the origin or history of any of our
domestic breeds. But, in fact, a breed, like a dialect of a language,
can hardly be said to have a distinct origin. A man preserves and breeds
from an individual with some slight deviation of structure, or takes
more care than usual in matching his best animals, and thus improves
them, and the improved animals slowly spread in the immediate
neighbourhood. But they will as yet hardly have a distinct name,
and from being only slightly valued, their history will have been
disregarded. When further improved by the same slow and gradual process,
they will spread more widely, and will be recognised as something
distinct and valuable, and will then probably first receive a provincial
name. In semi-civilised countries, with little free communication, the
spreading of a new sub-breed will be a slow process. As soon as the
points of value are once acknowledged, the principle, as I have called
it, of unconscious selection will always tend--perhaps more at one
period than at another, as the breed rises or falls in fashion--perhaps
more in one district than in another, according to the state of
civilisation of the inhabitants--slowly to add to the characteristic
features of the breed, whatever they may be. But the chance will be
infinitely small of any record having been preserved of such slow,
varying, and insensible changes.

CIRCUMSTANCES FAVOURABLE TO MAN'S POWER OF SELECTION.

I will now say a few words on the circumstances, favourable or the
reverse, to man's power of selection. A high degree of variability is
obviously favourable, as freely giving the materials for selection to
work on; not that mere individual differences are not amply sufficient,
with extreme care, to allow of the accumulation of a large amount
of modification in almost any desired direction. But as variations
manifestly useful or pleasing to man appear only occasionally, the
chance of their appearance will be much increased by a large number of
individuals being kept. Hence number is of the highest importance for
success. On this principle Marshall formerly remarked, with respect
to the sheep of part of Yorkshire, "As they generally belong to poor
people, and are mostly IN SMALL LOTS, they never can be improved." On
the other hand, nurserymen, from keeping large stocks of the same plant,
are generally far more successful than amateurs in raising new and
valuable varieties. A large number of individuals of an animal or
plant can be reared only where the conditions for its propagation are
favourable. When the individuals are scanty all will be allowed to
breed, whatever their quality may be, and this will effectually prevent
selection. But probably the most important element is that the animal or
plant should be so highly valued by man, that the closest attention is
paid to even the slightest deviations in its qualities or structure.
Unless such attention be paid nothing can be effected. I have seen it
gravely remarked, that it was most fortunate that the strawberry began
to vary just when gardeners began to attend to this plant. No doubt the
strawberry had always varied since it was cultivated, but the slight
varieties had been neglected. As soon, however, as gardeners picked out
individual plants with slightly larger, earlier, or better fruit, and
raised seedlings from them, and again picked out the best seedlings and
bred from them, then (with some aid by crossing distinct species)
those many admirable varieties of the strawberry were raised which have
appeared during the last half-century.

With animals, facility in preventing crosses is an important element
in the formation of new races--at least, in a country which is already
stocked with other races. In this respect enclosure of the land plays a
part. Wandering savages or the inhabitants of open plains rarely possess
more than one breed of the same species. Pigeons can be mated for life,
and this is a great convenience to the fancier, for thus many races may
be improved and kept true, though mingled in the same aviary; and this
circumstance must have largely favoured the formation of new breeds.
Pigeons, I may add, can be propagated in great numbers and at a very
quick rate, and inferior birds may be freely rejected, as when killed
they serve for food. On the other hand, cats, from their nocturnal
rambling habits, can not be easily matched, and, although so much valued
by women and children, we rarely see a distinct breed long kept up; such
breeds as we do sometimes see are almost always imported from some other
country. Although I do not doubt that some domestic animals vary less
than others, yet the rarity or absence of distinct breeds of the cat,
the donkey, peacock, goose, etc., may be attributed in main part
to selection not having been brought into play: in cats, from the
difficulty in pairing them; in donkeys, from only a few being kept by
poor people, and little attention paid to their breeding; for recently
in certain parts of Spain and of the United States this animal has been
surprisingly modified and improved by careful selection; in peacocks,
from not being very easily reared and a large stock not kept; in geese,
from being valuable only for two purposes, food and feathers, and more
especially from no pleasure having been felt in the display of distinct
breeds; but the goose, under the conditions to which it is exposed when
domesticated, seems to have a singularly inflexible organisation, though
it has varied to a slight extent, as I have elsewhere described.

Some authors have maintained that the amount of variation in our
domestic productions is soon reached, and can never afterward be
exceeded. It would be somewhat rash to assert that the limit has been
attained in any one case; for almost all our animals and plants have
been greatly improved in many ways within a recent period; and this
implies variation. It would be equally rash to assert that characters
now increased to their utmost limit, could not, after remaining fixed
for many centuries, again vary under new conditions of life. No doubt,
as Mr. Wallace has remarked with much truth, a limit will be at last
reached. For instance, there must be a limit to the fleetness of any
terrestrial animal, as this will be determined by the friction to
be overcome, the weight of the body to be carried, and the power of
contraction in the muscular fibres. But what concerns us is that the
domestic varieties of the same species differ from each other in almost
every character, which man has attended to and selected, more than do
the distinct species of the same genera. Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire
has proved this in regard to size, and so it is with colour, and
probably with the length of hair. With respect to fleetness, which
depends on many bodily characters, Eclipse was far fleeter, and
a dray-horse is comparably stronger, than any two natural species
belonging to the same genus. So with plants, the seeds of the different
varieties of the bean or maize probably differ more in size than do the
seeds of the distinct species in any one genus in the same two families.
The same remark holds good in regard to the fruit of the several
varieties of the plum, and still more strongly with the melon, as well
as in many other analogous cases.

To sum up on the origin of our domestic races of animals and plants.
Changed conditions of life are of the highest importance in causing
variability, both by acting directly on the organisation, and
indirectly by affecting the reproductive system. It is not probable
that variability is an inherent and necessary contingent, under all
circumstances. The greater or less force of inheritance and reversion
determine whether variations shall endure. Variability is governed
by many unknown laws, of which correlated growth is probably the most
important. Something, but how much we do not know, may be attributed to
the definite action of the conditions of life. Some, perhaps a great,
effect may be attributed to the increased use or disuse of parts. The
final result is thus rendered infinitely complex. In some cases the
intercrossing of aboriginally distinct species appears to have played
an important part in the origin of our breeds. When several breeds have
once been formed in any country, their occasional intercrossing, with
the aid of selection, has, no doubt, largely aided in the formation
of new sub-breeds; but the importance of crossing has been much
exaggerated, both in regard to animals and to those plants which are
propagated by seed. With plants which are temporarily propagated by
cuttings, buds, etc., the importance of crossing is immense; for the
cultivator may here disregard the extreme variability both of hybrids
and of mongrels, and the sterility of hybrids; but plants not propagated
by seed are of little importance to us, for their endurance is only
temporary. Over all these causes of change, the accumulative action of
selection, whether applied methodically and quickly, or unconsciously
and slowly, but more efficiently, seems to have been the predominant
power.




CHAPTER II. VARIATION UNDER NATURE.

 Variability--Individual differences--Doubtful species--Wide ranging,
 much diffused, and common species, vary most--Species of the larger
 genera in each country vary more frequently than the species of the
 smaller genera--Many of the species of the larger genera resemble
 varieties in being very closely, but unequally, related to each other,
 and in having restricted ranges.


Before applying the principles arrived at in the last chapter to organic
beings in a state of nature, we must briefly discuss whether these
latter are subject to any variation. To treat this subject properly, a
long catalogue of dry facts ought to be given; but these I shall reserve
for a future work. Nor shall I here discuss the various definitions
which have been given of the term species. No one definition has
satisfied all naturalists; yet every naturalist knows vaguely what
he means when he speaks of a species. Generally the term includes the
unknown element of a distinct act of creation. The term "variety" is
almost equally difficult to define; but here community of descent is
almost universally implied, though it can rarely be proved. We have also
what are called monstrosities; but they graduate into varieties. By a
monstrosity I presume is meant some considerable deviation of structure,
generally injurious, or not useful to the species. Some authors use
the term "variation" in a technical sense, as implying a modification
directly due to the physical conditions of life; and "variations" in
this sense are supposed not to be inherited; but who can say that the
dwarfed condition of shells in the brackish waters of the Baltic, or
dwarfed plants on Alpine summits, or the thicker fur of an animal from
far northwards, would not in some cases be inherited for at least a few
generations? And in this case I presume that the form would be called a
variety.

It may be doubted whether sudden and considerable deviations of
structure, such as we occasionally see in our domestic productions, more
especially with plants, are ever permanently propagated in a state
of nature. Almost every part of every organic being is so beautifully
related to its complex conditions of life that it seems as improbable
that any part should have been suddenly produced perfect, as that a
complex machine should have been invented by man in a perfect state.
Under domestication monstrosities sometimes occur which resemble normal
structures in widely different animals. Thus pigs have occasionally been
born with a sort of proboscis, and if any wild species of the same genus
had naturally possessed a proboscis, it might have been argued that this
had appeared as a monstrosity; but I have as yet failed to find, after
diligent search, cases of monstrosities resembling normal structures in
nearly allied forms, and these alone bear on the question. If monstrous
forms of this kind ever do appear in a state of nature and are capable
of reproduction (which is not always the case), as they occur rarely
and singly, their preservation would depend on unusually favourable
circumstances. They would, also, during the first and succeeding
generations cross with the ordinary form, and thus their abnormal
character would almost inevitably be lost. But I shall have to return
in a future chapter to the preservation and perpetuation of single or
occasional variations.

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES.

The many slight differences which appear in the offspring from the
same parents, or which it may be presumed have thus arisen, from being
observed in the individuals of the same species inhabiting the same
confined locality, may be called individual differences. No one supposes
that all the individuals of the same species are cast in the same actual
mould. These individual differences are of the highest importance for
us, for they are often inherited, as must be familiar to every one;
and they thus afford materials for natural selection to act on and
accumulate, in the same manner as man accumulates in any given direction
individual differences in his domesticated productions. These individual
differences generally affect what naturalists consider unimportant
parts; but I could show, by a long catalogue of facts, that parts
which must be called important, whether viewed under a physiological or
classificatory point of view, sometimes vary in the individuals of the
same species. I am convinced that the most experienced naturalist
would be surprised at the number of the cases of variability, even in
important parts of structure, which he could collect on good authority,
as I have collected, during a course of years. It should be remembered
that systematists are far from being pleased at finding variability
in important characters, and that there are not many men who will
laboriously examine internal and important organs, and compare them in
many specimens of the same species. It would never have been expected
that the branching of the main nerves close to the great central
ganglion of an insect would have been variable in the same species;
it might have been thought that changes of this nature could have been
effected only by slow degrees; yet Sir J. Lubbock has shown a degree of
variability in these main nerves in Coccus, which may almost be compared
to the irregular branching of the stem of a tree. This philosophical
naturalist, I may add, has also shown that the muscles in the larvae
of certain insects are far from uniform. Authors sometimes argue in a
circle when they state that important organs never vary; for these
same authors practically rank those parts as important (as some few
naturalists have honestly confessed) which do not vary; and, under
this point of view, no instance will ever be found of an important part
varying; but under any other point of view many instances assuredly can
be given.

There is one point connected with individual differences which is
extremely perplexing: I refer to those genera which have been called
"protean" or "polymorphic," in which species present an inordinate
amount of variation. With respect to many of these forms, hardly two
naturalists agree whether to rank them as species or as varieties. We
may instance Rubus, Rosa, and Hieracium among plants, several genera of
insects, and of Brachiopod shells. In most polymorphic genera some
of the species have fixed and definite characters. Genera which
are polymorphic in one country seem to be, with a few exceptions,
polymorphic in other countries, and likewise, judging from Brachiopod
shells, at former periods of time. These facts are very perplexing, for
they seem to show that this kind of variability is independent of the
conditions of life. I am inclined to suspect that we see, at least in
some of these polymorphic genera, variations which are of no service or
disservice to the species, and which consequently have not been seized
on and rendered definite by natural selection, as hereafter to be
explained.

Individuals of the same species often present, as is known to every one,
great differences of structure, independently of variation, as in the
two sexes of various animals, in the two or three castes of sterile
females or workers among insects, and in the immature and larval states
of many of the lower animals. There are, also, cases of dimorphism and
trimorphism, both with animals and plants. Thus, Mr. Wallace, who has
lately called attention to the subject, has shown that the females of
certain species of butterflies, in the Malayan Archipelago, regularly
appear under two or even three conspicuously distinct forms, not
connected by intermediate varieties. Fritz Muller has described
analogous but more extraordinary cases with the males of certain
Brazilian Crustaceans: thus, the male of a Tanais regularly occurs
under two distinct forms; one of these has strong and differently shaped
pincers, and the other has antennae much more abundantly furnished with
smelling-hairs. Although in most of these cases, the two or three forms,
both with animals and plants, are not now connected by intermediate
gradations, it is possible that they were once thus connected. Mr.
Wallace, for instance, describes a certain butterfly which presents in
the same island a great range of varieties connected by intermediate
links, and the extreme links of the chain closely resemble the two forms
of an allied dimorphic species inhabiting another part of the Malay
Archipelago. Thus also with ants, the several worker-castes are
generally quite distinct; but in some cases, as we shall hereafter see,
the castes are connected together by finely graduated varieties. So it
is, as I have myself observed, with some dimorphic plants. It certainly
at first appears a highly remarkable fact that the same female butterfly
should have the power of producing at the same time three distinct
female forms and a male; and that an hermaphrodite plant should produce
from the same seed-capsule three distinct hermaphrodite forms, bearing
three different kinds of females and three or even six different kinds
of males. Nevertheless these cases are only exaggerations of the common
fact that the female produces offspring of two sexes which sometimes
differ from each other in a wonderful manner.

DOUBTFUL SPECIES.

The forms which possess in some considerable degree the character of
species, but which are so closely similar to other forms, or are so
closely linked to them by intermediate gradations, that naturalists do
not like to rank them as distinct species, are in several respects the
most important for us. We have every reason to believe that many of
these doubtful and closely allied forms have permanently retained their
characters for a long time; for as long, as far as we know, as have good
and true species. Practically, when a naturalist can unite by means of
intermediate links any two forms, he treats the one as a variety of the
other, ranking the most common, but sometimes the one first described
as the species, and the other as the variety. But cases of great
difficulty, which I will not here enumerate, sometimes arise in deciding
whether or not to rank one form as a variety of another, even when
they are closely connected by intermediate links; nor will the commonly
assumed hybrid nature of the intermediate forms always remove the
difficulty. In very many cases, however, one form is ranked as a variety
of another, not because the intermediate links have actually been found,
but because analogy leads the observer to suppose either that they do
now somewhere exist, or may formerly have existed; and here a wide door
for the entry of doubt and conjecture is opened.

Hence, in determining whether a form should be ranked as a species or
a variety, the opinion of naturalists having sound judgment and wide
experience seems the only guide to follow. We must, however, in many
cases, decide by a majority of naturalists, for few well-marked and
well-known varieties can be named which have not been ranked as species
by at least some competent judges.

That varieties of this doubtful nature are far from uncommon cannot be
disputed. Compare the several floras of Great Britain, of France, or
of the United States, drawn up by different botanists, and see what
a surprising number of forms have been ranked by one botanist as good
species, and by another as mere varieties. Mr. H.C. Watson, to whom I
lie under deep obligation for assistance of all kinds, has marked for
me 182 British plants, which are generally considered as varieties, but
which have all been ranked by botanists as species; and in making this
list he has omitted many trifling varieties, but which nevertheless have
been ranked by some botanists as species, and he has entirely omitted
several highly polymorphic genera. Under genera, including the most
polymorphic forms, Mr. Babington gives 251 species, whereas Mr. Bentham
gives only 112--a difference of 139 doubtful forms! Among animals which
unite for each birth, and which are highly locomotive, doubtful forms,
ranked by one zoologist as a species and by another as a variety, can
rarely be found within the same country, but are common in separated
areas. How many of the birds and insects in North America and Europe,
which differ very slightly from each other, have been ranked by one
eminent naturalist as undoubted species, and by another as varieties,
or, as they are often called, geographical races! Mr. Wallace, in
several valuable papers on the various animals, especially on the
Lepidoptera, inhabiting the islands of the great Malayan Archipelago,
shows that they may be classed under four heads, namely, as variable
forms, as local forms, as geographical races or sub-species, and as true
representative species. The first or variable forms vary much within the
limits of the same island. The local forms are moderately constant and
distinct in each separate island; but when all from the several islands
are compared together, the differences are seen to be so slight and
graduated that it is impossible to define or describe them, though
at the same time the extreme forms are sufficiently distinct. The
geographical races or sub-species are local forms completely fixed and
isolated; but as they do not differ from each other by strongly marked
and important characters, "There is no possible test but individual
opinion to determine which of them shall be considered as species and
which as varieties." Lastly, representative species fill the same
place in the natural economy of each island as do the local forms and
sub-species; but as they are distinguished from each other by a greater
amount of difference than that between the local forms and sub-species,
they are almost universally ranked by naturalists as true species.
Nevertheless, no certain criterion can possibly be given by which
variable forms, local forms, sub species and representative species can
be recognised.

Many years ago, when comparing, and seeing others compare, the birds
from the closely neighbouring islands of the Galapagos Archipelago,
one with another, and with those from the American mainland, I was
much struck how entirely vague and arbitrary is the distinction between
species and varieties. On the islets of the little Madeira group there
are many insects which are characterized as varieties in Mr. Wollaston's
admirable work, but which would certainly be ranked as distinct species
by many entomologists. Even Ireland has a few animals, now generally
regarded as varieties, but which have been ranked as species by some
zoologists. Several experienced ornithologists consider our British red
grouse as only a strongly marked race of a Norwegian species, whereas
the greater number rank it as an undoubted species peculiar to Great
Britain. A wide distance between the homes of two doubtful forms leads
many naturalists to rank them as distinct species; but what distance, it
has been well asked, will suffice if that between America and Europe
is ample, will that between Europe and the Azores, or Madeira, or the
Canaries, or between the several islets of these small archipelagos, be
sufficient?

Mr. B.D. Walsh, a distinguished entomologist of the United States, has
described what he calls Phytophagic varieties and Phytophagic species.
Most vegetable-feeding insects live on one kind of plant or on one
group of plants; some feed indiscriminately on many kinds, but do not
in consequence vary. In several cases, however, insects found living on
different plants, have been observed by Mr. Walsh to present in their
larval or mature state, or in both states, slight, though constant
differences in colour, size, or in the nature of their secretions.
In some instances the males alone, in other instances, both males and
females, have been observed thus to differ in a slight degree. When the
differences are rather more strongly marked, and when both sexes and
all ages are affected, the forms are ranked by all entomologists as good
species. But no observer can determine for another, even if he can do so
for himself, which of these Phytophagic forms ought to be called species
and which varieties. Mr. Walsh ranks the forms which it may be supposed
would freely intercross, as varieties; and those which appear to have
lost this power, as species. As the differences depend on the insects
having long fed on distinct plants, it cannot be expected that
intermediate links connecting the several forms should now be found.
The naturalist thus loses his best guide in determining whether to rank
doubtful forms as varieties or species. This likewise necessarily occurs
with closely allied organisms, which inhabit distinct continents or
islands. When, on the other hand, an animal or plant ranges over the
same continent, or inhabits many islands in the same archipelago, and
presents different forms in the different areas, there is always a
good chance that intermediate forms will be discovered which will link
together the extreme states; and these are then degraded to the rank of
varieties.

Some few naturalists maintain that animals never present varieties; but
then these same naturalists rank the slightest difference as of specific
value; and when the same identical form is met with in two distant
countries, or in two geological formations, they believe that two
distinct species are hidden under the same dress. The term species thus
comes to be a mere useless abstraction, implying and assuming a separate
act of creation. It is certain that many forms, considered by highly
competent judges to be varieties, resemble species so completely in
character that they have been thus ranked by other highly competent
judges. But to discuss whether they ought to be called species or
varieties, before any definition of these terms has been generally
accepted, is vainly to beat the air.

Many of the cases of strongly marked varieties or doubtful species well
deserve consideration; for several interesting lines of argument, from
geographical distribution, analogical variation, hybridism, etc., have
been brought to bear in the attempt to determine their rank; but space
does not here permit me to discuss them. Close investigation, in many
cases, will no doubt bring naturalists to agree how to rank doubtful
forms. Yet it must be confessed that it is in the best known countries
that we find the greatest number of them. I have been struck with the
fact that if any animal or plant in a state of nature be highly useful
to man, or from any cause closely attracts his attention, varieties of
it will almost universally be found recorded. These varieties, moreover,
will often be ranked by some authors as species. Look at the common oak,
how closely it has been studied; yet a German author makes more than a
dozen species out of forms, which are almost universally considered
by other botanists to be varieties; and in this country the highest
botanical authorities and practical men can be quoted to show that the
sessile and pedunculated oaks are either good and distinct species or
mere varieties.

I may here allude to a remarkable memoir lately published by A. de
Candolle, on the oaks of the whole world. No one ever had more ample
materials for the discrimination of the species, or could have worked on
them with more zeal and sagacity. He first gives in detail all the many
points of structure which vary in the several species, and estimates
numerically the relative frequency of the variations. He specifies above
a dozen characters which may be found varying even on the same branch,
sometimes according to age or development, sometimes without any
assignable reason. Such characters are not of course of specific value,
but they are, as Asa Gray has remarked in commenting on this memoir,
such as generally enter into specific definitions. De Candolle then goes
on to say that he gives the rank of species to the forms that differ by
characters never varying on the same tree, and never found connected
by intermediate states. After this discussion, the result of so much
labour, he emphatically remarks: "They are mistaken, who repeat that the
greater part of our species are clearly limited, and that the doubtful
species are in a feeble minority. This seemed to be true, so long as
a genus was imperfectly known, and its species were founded upon a few
specimens, that is to say, were provisional. Just as we come to know
them better, intermediate forms flow in, and doubts as to specific
limits augment." He also adds that it is the best known species which
present the greatest number of spontaneous varieties and sub-varieties.
Thus Quercus robur has twenty-eight varieties, all of which, excepting
six, are clustered round three sub-species, namely Q. pedunculata,
sessiliflora and pubescens. The forms which connect these three
sub-species are comparatively rare; and, as Asa Gray again remarks, if
these connecting forms which are now rare were to become totally extinct
the three sub-species would hold exactly the same relation to each other
as do the four or five provisionally admitted species which closely
surround the typical Quercus robur. Finally, De Candolle admits that
out of the 300 species, which will be enumerated in his Prodromus
as belonging to the oak family, at least two-thirds are provisional
species, that is, are not known strictly to fulfil the definition above
given of a true species. It should be added that De Candolle no longer
believes that species are immutable creations, but concludes that the
derivative theory is the most natural one, "and the most accordant with
the known facts in palaeontology, geographical botany and zoology, of
anatomical structure and classification."

When a young naturalist commences the study of a group of organisms
quite unknown to him he is at first much perplexed in determining what
differences to consider as specific and what as varietal; for he knows
nothing of the amount and kind of variation to which the group is
subject; and this shows, at least, how very generally there is some
variation. But if he confine his attention to one class within one
country he will soon make up his mind how to rank most of the doubtful
forms. His general tendency will be to make many species, for he will
become impressed, just like the pigeon or poultry fancier before alluded
to, with the amount of difference in the forms which he is continually
studying; and he has little general knowledge of analogical variation
in other groups and in other countries by which to correct his first
impressions. As he extends the range of his observations he will meet
with more cases of difficulty; for he will encounter a greater number of
closely-allied forms. But if his observations be widely extended he
will in the end generally be able to make up his own mind; but he will
succeed in this at the expense of admitting much variation, and the
truth of this admission will often be disputed by other naturalists.
When he comes to study allied forms brought from countries not now
continuous, in which case he cannot hope to find intermediate links,
he will be compelled to trust almost entirely to analogy, and his
difficulties will rise to a climax.

Certainly no clear line of demarcation has as yet been drawn between
species and sub-species--that is, the forms which in the opinion of some
naturalists come very near to, but do not quite arrive at, the rank of
species; or, again, between sub-species and well-marked varieties, or
between lesser varieties and individual differences. These differences
blend into each other by an insensible series; and a series impresses
the mind with the idea of an actual passage.

Hence I look at individual differences, though of small interest to the
systematist, as of the highest importance for us, as being the first
step towards such slight varieties as are barely thought worth recording
in works on natural history. And I look at varieties which are in any
degree more distinct and permanent, as steps toward more strongly marked
and permanent varieties; and at the latter, as leading to sub-species,
and then to species. The passage from one stage of difference to another
may, in many cases, be the simple result of the nature of the organism
and of the different physical conditions to which it has long been
exposed; but with respect to the more important and adaptive characters,
the passage from one stage of difference to another may be safely
attributed to the cumulative action of natural selection, hereafter
to be explained, and to the effects of the increased use or disuse
of parts. A well-marked variety may therefore be called an incipient
species; but whether this belief is justifiable must be judged by the
weight of the various facts and considerations to be given throughout
this work.

It need not be supposed that all varieties or incipient species attain
the rank of species. They may become extinct, or they may endure as
varieties for very long periods, as has been shown to be the case by Mr.
Wollaston with the varieties of certain fossil land-shells in Madeira,
and with plants by Gaston de Saporta. If a variety were to flourish so
as to exceed in numbers the parent species, it would then rank as the
species, and the species as the variety; or it might come to supplant
and exterminate the parent species; or both might co-exist, and both
rank as independent species. But we shall hereafter return to this
subject.

From these remarks it will be seen that I look at the term species
as one arbitrarily given, for the sake of convenience, to a set
of individuals closely resembling each other, and that it does not
essentially differ from the term variety, which is given to less
distinct and more fluctuating forms. The term variety, again,
in comparison with mere individual differences, is also applied
arbitrarily, for convenience sake.

WIDE-RANGING, MUCH DIFFUSED, AND COMMON SPECIES VARY MOST.

Guided by theoretical considerations, I thought that some interesting
results might be obtained in regard to the nature and relations of the
species which vary most, by tabulating all the varieties in several
well-worked floras. At first this seemed a simple task; but Mr. H.C.
Watson, to whom I am much indebted for valuable advice and assistance
on this subject, soon convinced me that there were many difficulties, as
did subsequently Dr. Hooker, even in stronger terms. I shall reserve for
a future work the discussion of these difficulties, and the tables of
the proportional numbers of the varying species. Dr. Hooker permits me
to add that after having carefully read my manuscript, and examined
the tables, he thinks that the following statements are fairly well
established. The whole subject, however, treated as it necessarily here
is with much brevity, is rather perplexing, and allusions cannot be
avoided to the "struggle for existence," "divergence of character," and
other questions, hereafter to be discussed.

Alphonse de Candolle and others have shown that plants which have
very wide ranges generally present varieties; and this might have been
expected, as they are exposed to diverse physical conditions, and as
they come into competition (which, as we shall hereafter see, is a far
more important circumstance) with different sets of organic beings. But
my tables further show that, in any limited country, the species which
are the most common, that is abound most in individuals, and the species
which are most widely diffused within their own country (and this is a
different consideration from wide range, and to a certain extent from
commonness), oftenest give rise to varieties sufficiently well-marked to
have been recorded in botanical works. Hence it is the most flourishing,
or, as they may be called, the dominant species--those which range
widely, are the most diffused in their own country, and are the most
numerous in individuals--which oftenest produce well-marked varieties,
or, as I consider them, incipient species. And this, perhaps, might have
been anticipated; for, as varieties, in order to become in any degree
permanent, necessarily have to struggle with the other inhabitants of
the country, the species which are already dominant will be the most
likely to yield offspring, which, though in some slight degree modified,
still inherit those advantages that enabled their parents to become
dominant over their compatriots. In these remarks on predominence, it
should be understood that reference is made only to the forms which come
into competition with each other, and more especially to the members
of the same genus or class having nearly similar habits of life. With
respect to the number of individuals or commonness of species, the
comparison of course relates only to the members of the same group. One
of the higher plants may be said to be dominant if it be more numerous
in individuals and more widely diffused than the other plants of the
same country, which live under nearly the same conditions. A plant of
this kind is not the less dominant because some conferva inhabiting
the water or some parasitic fungus is infinitely more numerous in
individuals, and more widely diffused. But if the conferva or parasitic
fungus exceeds its allies in the above respects, it will then be
dominant within its own class.

SPECIES OF THE LARGER GENERA IN EACH COUNTRY VARY MORE FREQUENTLY THAN
THE SPECIES OF THE SMALLER GENERA.

If the plants inhabiting a country as described in any Flora, be divided
into two equal masses, all those in the larger genera (i.e., those
including many species) being placed on one side, and all those in the
smaller genera on the other side, the former will be found to include a
somewhat larger number of the very common and much diffused or dominant
species. This might have been anticipated, for the mere fact of many
species of the same genus inhabiting any country, shows that there
is something in the organic or inorganic conditions of that country
favourable to the genus; and, consequently, we might have expected to
have found in the larger genera, or those including many species, a
larger proportional number of dominant species. But so many causes tend
to obscure this result, that I am surprised that my tables show even a
small majority on the side of the larger genera. I will here allude
to only two causes of obscurity. Fresh water and salt-loving plants
generally have very wide ranges and are much diffused, but this seems to
be connected with the nature of the stations inhabited by them, and has
little or no relation to the size of the genera to which the species
belong. Again, plants low in the scale of organisation are generally
much more widely diffused than plants higher in the scale; and here
again there is no close relation to the size of the genera. The cause of
lowly-organised plants ranging widely will be discussed in our chapter
on Geographical Distribution.

From looking at species as only strongly marked and well-defined
varieties, I was led to anticipate that the species of the larger genera
in each country would oftener present varieties, than the species of the
smaller genera; for wherever many closely related species (i.e., species
of the same genus) have been formed, many varieties or incipient species
ought, as a general rule, to be now forming. Where many large trees
grow, we expect to find saplings. Where many species of a genus have
been formed through variation, circumstances have been favourable
for variation; and hence we might expect that the circumstances would
generally still be favourable to variation. On the other hand, if we
look at each species as a special act of creation, there is no apparent
reason why more varieties should occur in a group having many species,
than in one having few.

To test the truth of this anticipation I have arranged the plants of
twelve countries, and the coleopterous insects of two districts, into
two nearly equal masses, the species of the larger genera on one side,
and those of the smaller genera on the other side, and it has invariably
proved to be the case that a larger proportion of the species on the
side of the larger genera presented varieties, than on the side of the
smaller genera. Moreover, the species of the large genera which present
any varieties, invariably present a larger average number of varieties
than do the species of the small genera. Both these results follow when
another division is made, and when all the least genera, with from only
one to four species, are altogether excluded from the tables. These
facts are of plain signification on the view that species are only
strongly marked and permanent varieties; for wherever many species of
the same genus have been formed, or where, if we may use the expression,
the manufactory of species has been active, we ought generally to find
the manufactory still in action, more especially as we have every reason
to believe the process of manufacturing new species to be a slow one.
And this certainly holds true if varieties be looked at as incipient
species; for my tables clearly show, as a general rule, that, wherever
many species of a genus have been formed, the species of that genus
present a number of varieties, that is, of incipient species, beyond the
average. It is not that all large genera are now varying much, and are
thus increasing in the number of their species, or that no small genera
are now varying and increasing; for if this had been so, it would have
been fatal to my theory; inasmuch as geology plainly tells us that small
genera have in the lapse of time often increased greatly in size;
and that large genera have often come to their maxima, declined, and
disappeared. All that we want to show is, that where many species of a
genus have been formed, on an average many are still forming; and this
certainly holds good.

MANY OF THE SPECIES INCLUDED WITHIN THE LARGER GENERA RESEMBLE VARIETIES
IN BEING VERY CLOSELY, BUT UNEQUALLY, RELATED TO EACH OTHER, AND IN
HAVING RESTRICTED RANGES.

There are other relations between the species of large genera and their
recorded varieties which deserve notice. We have seen that there is no
infallible criterion by which to distinguish species and well-marked
varieties; and when intermediate links have not been found between
doubtful forms, naturalists are compelled to come to a determination by
the amount of difference between them, judging by analogy whether or not
the amount suffices to raise one or both to the rank of species. Hence
the amount of difference is one very important criterion in settling
whether two forms should be ranked as species or varieties. Now Fries
has remarked in regard to plants, and Westwood in regard to insects,
that in large genera the amount of difference between the species is
often exceedingly small. I have endeavoured to test this numerically by
averages, and, as far as my imperfect results go, they confirm the view.
I have also consulted some sagacious and experienced observers,
and, after deliberation, they concur in this view. In this respect,
therefore, the species of the larger genera resemble varieties, more
than do the species of the smaller genera. Or the case may be put in
another way, and it may be said, that in the larger genera, in which a
number of varieties or incipient species greater than the average are
now manufacturing, many of the species already manufactured still to a
certain extent resemble varieties, for they differ from each other by a
less than the usual amount of difference.

Moreover, the species of the larger genera are related to each other, in
the same manner as the varieties of any one species are related to
each other. No naturalist pretends that all the species of a genus are
equally distinct from each other; they may generally be divided into
sub-genera, or sections, or lesser groups. As Fries has well remarked,
little groups of species are generally clustered like satellites around
other species. And what are varieties but groups of forms, unequally
related to each other, and clustered round certain forms--that is, round
their parent-species. Undoubtedly there is one most important point of
difference between varieties and species, namely, that the amount of
difference between varieties, when compared with each other or with
their parent-species, is much less than that between the species of the
same genus. But when we come to discuss the principle, as I call it, of
divergence of character, we shall see how this may be explained, and
how the lesser differences between varieties tend to increase into the
greater differences between species.

There is one other point which is worth notice. Varieties generally have
much restricted ranges. This statement is indeed scarcely more than a
truism, for if a variety were found to have a wider range than that of
its supposed parent-species, their denominations would be reversed.
But there is reason to believe that the species which are very closely
allied to other species, and in so far resemble varieties, often have
much restricted ranges. For instance, Mr. H.C. Watson has marked for me
in the well-sifted London catalogue of Plants (4th edition) sixty-three
plants which are therein ranked as species, but which he considers as
so closely allied to other species as to be of doubtful value: these
sixty-three reputed species range on an average over 6.9 of the
provinces into which Mr. Watson has divided Great Britain. Now, in this
same catalogue, fifty-three acknowledged varieties are recorded, and
these range over 7.7 provinces; whereas, the species to which these
varieties belong range over 14.3 provinces. So that the acknowledged
varieties have very nearly the same restricted average range, as have
the closely allied forms, marked for me by Mr. Watson as doubtful
species, but which are almost universally ranked by British botanists as
good and true species.

SUMMARY.

Finally, varieties cannot be distinguished from species--except, first,
by the discovery of intermediate linking forms; and, secondly, by a
certain indefinite amount of difference between them; for two forms,
if differing very little, are generally ranked as varieties,
notwithstanding that they cannot be closely connected; but the amount
of difference considered necessary to give to any two forms the rank of
species cannot be defined. In genera having more than the average number
of species in any country, the species of these genera have more than
the average number of varieties. In large genera the species are apt to
be closely but unequally allied together, forming little clusters round
other species. Species very closely allied to other species apparently
have restricted ranges. In all these respects the species of large
genera present a strong analogy with varieties. And we can clearly
understand these analogies, if species once existed as varieties, and
thus originated; whereas, these analogies are utterly inexplicable if
species are independent creations.

We have also seen that it is the most flourishing or dominant species
of the larger genera within each class which on an average yield the
greatest number of varieties, and varieties, as we shall hereafter see,
tend to become converted into new and distinct species. Thus the larger
genera tend to become larger; and throughout nature the forms of life
which are now dominant tend to become still more dominant by leaving
many modified and dominant descendants. But, by steps hereafter to be
explained, the larger genera also tend to break up into smaller genera.
And thus, the forms of life throughout the universe become divided into
groups subordinate to groups.




CHAPTER III. STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE.

 Its bearing on natural selection--The term used in a wide
 sense--Geometrical ratio of increase--Rapid increase of naturalised
 animals and plants--Nature of the checks to increase--Competition
 universal--Effects of climate--Protection from the number of
 individuals--Complex relations of all animals and plants throughout
 nature--Struggle for life most severe between individuals and varieties
 of the same species: often severe between species of the same genus--The
 relation of organism to organism the most important of all relations.

Before entering on the subject of this chapter I must make a few
preliminary remarks to show how the struggle for existence bears on
natural selection. It has been seen in the last chapter that
among organic beings in a state of nature there is some individual
variability: indeed I am not aware that this has ever been disputed.
It is immaterial for us whether a multitude of doubtful forms be called
species or sub-species or varieties; what rank, for instance, the two or
three hundred doubtful forms of British plants are entitled to hold,
if the existence of any well-marked varieties be admitted. But the
mere existence of individual variability and of some few well-marked
varieties, though necessary as the foundation for the work, helps us but
little in understanding how species arise in nature. How have all those
exquisite adaptations of one part of the organisation to another part,
and to the conditions of life and of one organic being to another being,
been perfected? We see these beautiful co-adaptations most plainly in
the woodpecker and the mistletoe; and only a little less plainly in the
humblest parasite which clings to the hairs of a quadruped or feathers
of a bird; in the structure of the beetle which dives through the water;
in the plumed seed which is wafted by the gentlest breeze; in short, we
see beautiful adaptations everywhere and in every part of the organic
world.

Again, it may be asked, how is it that varieties, which I have called
incipient species, become ultimately converted into good and distinct
species, which in most cases obviously differ from each other far
more than do the varieties of the same species? How do those groups
of species, which constitute what are called distinct genera and which
differ from each other more than do the species of the same genus,
arise? All these results, as we shall more fully see in the next
chapter, follow from the struggle for life. Owing to this struggle,
variations, however slight and from whatever cause proceeding, if they
be in any degree profitable to the individuals of a species, in their
infinitely complex relations to other organic beings and to their
physical conditions of life, will tend to the preservation of such
individuals, and will generally be inherited by the offspring. The
offspring, also, will thus have a better chance of surviving, for, of
the many individuals of any species which are periodically born, but a
small number can survive. I have called this principle, by which
each slight variation, if useful, is preserved, by the term natural
selection, in order to mark its relation to man's power of selection.
But the expression often used by Mr. Herbert Spencer, of the Survival of
the Fittest, is more accurate, and is sometimes equally convenient. We
have seen that man by selection can certainly produce great results, and
can adapt organic beings to his own uses, through the accumulation of
slight but useful variations, given to him by the hand of Nature. But
Natural Selection, we shall hereafter see, is a power incessantly ready
for action, and is as immeasurably superior to man's feeble efforts, as
the works of Nature are to those of Art.

We will now discuss in a little more detail the struggle for existence.
In my future work this subject will be treated, as it well deserves,
at greater length. The elder De Candolle and Lyell have largely and
philosophically shown that all organic beings are exposed to severe
competition. In regard to plants, no one has treated this subject with
more spirit and ability than W. Herbert, Dean of Manchester, evidently
the result of his great horticultural knowledge. Nothing is easier than
to admit in words the truth of the universal struggle for life, or
more difficult--at least I found it so--than constantly to bear this
conclusion in mind. Yet unless it be thoroughly engrained in the mind,
the whole economy of nature, with every fact on distribution, rarity,
abundance, extinction, and variation, will be dimly seen or quite
misunderstood. We behold the face of nature bright with gladness, we
often see superabundance of food; we do not see or we forget that the
birds which are idly singing round us mostly live on insects or seeds,
and are thus constantly destroying life; or we forget how largely these
songsters, or their eggs, or their nestlings, are destroyed by birds and
beasts of prey; we do not always bear in mind, that, though food may be
now superabundant, it is not so at all seasons of each recurring year.

THE TERM, STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE, USED IN A LARGE SENSE.

I should premise that I use this term in a large and metaphorical sense,
including dependence of one being on another, and including (which is
more important) not only the life of the individual, but success in
leaving progeny. Two canine animals, in a time of dearth, may be truly
said to struggle with each other which shall get food and live. But a
plant on the edge of a desert is said to struggle for life against the
drought, though more properly it should be said to be dependent on the
moisture. A plant which annually produces a thousand seeds, of which
only one of an average comes to maturity, may be more truly said to
struggle with the plants of the same and other kinds which already
clothe the ground. The mistletoe is dependent on the apple and a few
other trees, but can only in a far-fetched sense be said to struggle
with these trees, for, if too many of these parasites grow on the same
tree, it languishes and dies. But several seedling mistletoes, growing
close together on the same branch, may more truly be said to struggle
with each other. As the mistletoe is disseminated by birds, its
existence depends on them; and it may metaphorically be said to struggle
with other fruit-bearing plants, in tempting the birds to devour and
thus disseminate its seeds. In these several senses, which pass into
each other, I use for convenience sake the general term of Struggle for
Existence.

GEOMETRICAL RATIO OF INCREASE.

A struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high rate at which
all organic beings tend to increase. Every being, which during its
natural lifetime produces several eggs or seeds, must suffer destruction
during some period of its life, and during some season or occasional
year, otherwise, on the principle of geometrical increase, its numbers
would quickly become so inordinately great that no country could support
the product. Hence, as more individuals are produced than can possibly
survive, there must in every case be a struggle for existence, either
one individual with another of the same species, or with the individuals
of distinct species, or with the physical conditions of life. It is the
doctrine of Malthus applied with manifold force to the whole animal and
vegetable kingdoms; for in this case there can be no artificial increase
of food, and no prudential restraint from marriage. Although some
species may be now increasing, more or less rapidly, in numbers, all
cannot do so, for the world would not hold them.

There is no exception to the rule that every organic being naturally
increases at so high a rate, that, if not destroyed, the earth would
soon be covered by the progeny of a single pair. Even slow-breeding
man has doubled in twenty-five years, and at this rate, in less than
a thousand years, there would literally not be standing room for his
progeny. Linnaeus has calculated that if an annual plant produced only
two seeds--and there is no plant so unproductive as this--and their
seedlings next year produced two, and so on, then in twenty years there
would be a million plants. The elephant is reckoned the slowest breeder
of all known animals, and I have taken some pains to estimate its
probable minimum rate of natural increase; it will be safest to assume
that it begins breeding when thirty years old, and goes on breeding
till ninety years old, bringing forth six young in the interval, and
surviving till one hundred years old; if this be so, after a period of
from 740 to 750 years there would be nearly nineteen million elephants
alive descended from the first pair.

But we have better evidence on this subject than mere theoretical
calculations, namely, the numerous recorded cases of the astonishingly
rapid increase of various animals in a state of nature, when
circumstances have been favourable to them during two or three following
seasons. Still more striking is the evidence from our domestic animals
of many kinds which have run wild in several parts of the world; if the
statements of the rate of increase of slow-breeding cattle and horses
in South America, and latterly in Australia, had not been well
authenticated, they would have been incredible. So it is with plants;
cases could be given of introduced plants which have become common
throughout whole islands in a period of less than ten years. Several of
the plants, such as the cardoon and a tall thistle, which are now the
commonest over the wide plains of La Plata, clothing square leagues
of surface almost to the exclusion of every other plant, have been
introduced from Europe; and there are plants which now range in India,
as I hear from Dr. Falconer, from Cape Comorin to the Himalaya, which
have been imported from America since its discovery. In such cases, and
endless others could be given, no one supposes that the fertility of
the animals or plants has been suddenly and temporarily increased in any
sensible degree. The obvious explanation is that the conditions of life
have been highly favourable, and that there has consequently been less
destruction of the old and young and that nearly all the young have been
enabled to breed. Their geometrical ratio of increase, the result
of which never fails to be surprising, simply explains their
extraordinarily rapid increase and wide diffusion in their new homes.

In a state of nature almost every full-grown plant annually produces
seed, and among animals there are very few which do not annually pair.
Hence we may confidently assert that all plants and animals are tending
to increase at a geometrical ratio--that all would rapidly stock every
station in which they could any how exist, and that this geometrical
tendency to increase must be checked by destruction at some period of
life. Our familiarity with the larger domestic animals tends, I think,
to mislead us; we see no great destruction falling on them, and we do
not keep in mind that thousands are annually slaughtered for food,
and that in a state of nature an equal number would have somehow to be
disposed of.

The only difference between organisms which annually produce eggs or
seeds by the thousand, and those which produce extremely few, is,
that the slow breeders would require a few more years to people, under
favourable conditions, a whole district, let it be ever so large. The
condor lays a couple of eggs and the ostrich a score, and yet in the
same country the condor may be the more numerous of the two. The Fulmar
petrel lays but one egg, yet it is believed to be the most numerous bird
in the world. One fly deposits hundreds of eggs, and another, like the
hippobosca, a single one. But this difference does not determine how
many individuals of the two species can be supported in a district. A
large number of eggs is of some importance to those species which depend
on a fluctuating amount of food, for it allows them rapidly to increase
in number. But the real importance of a large number of eggs or seeds is
to make up for much destruction at some period of life; and this period
in the great majority of cases is an early one. If an animal can in any
way protect its own eggs or young, a small number may be produced, and
yet the average stock be fully kept up; but if many eggs or young are
destroyed, many must be produced or the species will become extinct. It
would suffice to keep up the full number of a tree, which lived on an
average for a thousand years, if a single seed were produced once in a
thousand years, supposing that this seed were never destroyed and could
be ensured to germinate in a fitting place; so that, in all cases, the
average number of any animal or plant depends only indirectly on the
number of its eggs or seeds.

In looking at Nature, it is most necessary to keep the foregoing
considerations always in mind--never to forget that every single organic
being may be said to be striving to the utmost to increase in numbers;
that each lives by a struggle at some period of its life; that heavy
destruction inevitably falls either on the young or old during each
generation or at recurrent intervals. Lighten any check, mitigate the
destruction ever so little, and the number of the species will almost
instantaneously increase to any amount.

NATURE OF THE CHECKS TO INCREASE.

The causes which check the natural tendency of each species to increase
are most obscure. Look at the most vigorous species; by as much as it
swarms in numbers, by so much will it tend to increase still further. We
know not exactly what the checks are even in a single instance. Nor will
this surprise any one who reflects how ignorant we are on this head,
even in regard to mankind, although so incomparably better known than
any other animal. This subject of the checks to increase has been ably
treated by several authors, and I hope in a future work to discuss it at
considerable length, more especially in regard to the feral animals of
South America. Here I will make only a few remarks, just to recall to
the reader's mind some of the chief points. Eggs or very young animals
seem generally to suffer most, but this is not invariably the case. With
plants there is a vast destruction of seeds, but from some observations
which I have made it appears that the seedlings suffer most from
germinating in ground already thickly stocked with other plants.
Seedlings, also, are destroyed in vast numbers by various enemies; for
instance, on a piece of ground three feet long and two wide, dug and
cleared, and where there could be no choking from other plants, I marked
all the seedlings of our native weeds as they came up, and out of 357
no less than 295 were destroyed, chiefly by slugs and insects. If turf
which has long been mown, and the case would be the same with turf
closely browsed by quadrupeds, be let to grow, the more vigorous plants
gradually kill the less vigorous, though fully grown plants; thus out of
twenty species grown on a little plot of mown turf (three feet by four)
nine species perished, from the other species being allowed to grow up
freely.

The amount of food for each species, of course, gives the extreme limit
to which each can increase; but very frequently it is not the obtaining
food, but the serving as prey to other animals, which determines the
average number of a species. Thus, there seems to be little doubt that
the stock of partridges, grouse, and hares on any large estate depends
chiefly on the destruction of vermin. If not one head of game were shot
during the next twenty years in England, and, at the same time, if no
vermin were destroyed, there would, in all probability, be less game
than at present, although hundreds of thousands of game animals are now
annually shot. On the other hand, in some cases, as with the elephant,
none are destroyed by beasts of prey; for even the tiger in India most
rarely dares to attack a young elephant protected by its dam.

Climate plays an important part in determining the average numbers of
a species, and periodical seasons of extreme cold or drought seem to be
the most effective of all checks. I estimated (chiefly from the greatly
reduced numbers of nests in the spring) that the winter of 1854-5
destroyed four-fifths of the birds in my own grounds; and this is
a tremendous destruction, when we remember that ten per cent. is an
extraordinarily severe mortality from epidemics with man. The action of
climate seems at first sight to be quite independent of the struggle for
existence; but in so far as climate chiefly acts in reducing food, it
brings on the most severe struggle between the individuals, whether of
the same or of distinct species, which subsist on the same kind of food.
Even when climate, for instance, extreme cold, acts directly, it will
be the least vigorous individuals, or those which have got least food
through the advancing winter, which will suffer the most. When we travel
from south to north, or from a damp region to a dry, we invariably
see some species gradually getting rarer and rarer, and finally
disappearing; and the change of climate being conspicuous, we are
tempted to attribute the whole effect to its direct action. But this is
a false view; we forget that each species, even where it most abounds,
is constantly suffering enormous destruction at some period of its life,
from enemies or from competitors for the same place and food; and if
these enemies or competitors be in the least degree favoured by any
slight change of climate, they will increase in numbers; and as each
area is already fully stocked with inhabitants, the other species must
decrease. When we travel southward and see a species decreasing in
numbers, we may feel sure that the cause lies quite as much in other
species being favoured, as in this one being hurt. So it is when we
travel northward, but in a somewhat lesser degree, for the number of
species of all kinds, and therefore of competitors, decreases northward;
hence in going northward, or in ascending a mountain, we far oftener
meet with stunted forms, due to the DIRECTLY injurious action of
climate, than we do in proceeding southward or in descending a mountain.
When we reach the Arctic regions, or snow-capped summits, or absolute
deserts, the struggle for life is almost exclusively with the elements.

That climate acts in main part indirectly by favouring other species we
clearly see in the prodigious number of plants which in our gardens can
perfectly well endure our climate, but which never become naturalised,
for they cannot compete with our native plants nor resist destruction by
our native animals.

When a species, owing to highly favourable circumstances, increases
inordinately in numbers in a small tract, epidemics--at least, this
seems generally to occur with our game animals--often ensue; and here
we have a limiting check independent of the struggle for life. But even
some of these so-called epidemics appear to be due to parasitic worms,
which have from some cause, possibly in part through facility of
diffusion among the crowded animals, been disproportionally favoured:
and here comes in a sort of struggle between the parasite and its prey.

On the other hand, in many cases, a large stock of individuals of the
same species, relatively to the numbers of its enemies, is absolutely
necessary for its preservation. Thus we can easily raise plenty of
corn and rape-seed, etc., in our fields, because the seeds are in great
excess compared with the number of birds which feed on them; nor can
the birds, though having a superabundance of food at this one season,
increase in number proportionally to the supply of seed, as their
numbers are checked during the winter; but any one who has tried knows
how troublesome it is to get seed from a few wheat or other such plants
in a garden; I have in this case lost every single seed. This view of
the necessity of a large stock of the same species for its preservation,
explains, I believe, some singular facts in nature such as that of very
rare plants being sometimes extremely abundant, in the few spots where
they do exist; and that of some social plants being social, that is
abounding in individuals, even on the extreme verge of their range. For
in such cases, we may believe, that a plant could exist only where
the conditions of its life were so favourable that many could exist
together, and thus save the species from utter destruction. I should
add that the good effects of intercrossing, and the ill effects of close
interbreeding, no doubt come into play in many of these cases; but I
will not here enlarge on this subject.

COMPLEX RELATIONS OF ALL ANIMALS AND PLANTS TO EACH OTHER IN THE
STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE.

Many cases are on record showing how complex and unexpected are the
checks and relations between organic beings, which have to struggle
together in the same country. I will give only a single instance, which,
though a simple one, interested me. In Staffordshire, on the estate of
a relation, where I had ample means of investigation, there was a large
and extremely barren heath, which had never been touched by the hand
of man; but several hundred acres of exactly the same nature had been
enclosed twenty-five years previously and planted with Scotch fir. The
change in the native vegetation of the planted part of the heath was
most remarkable, more than is generally seen in passing from one quite
different soil to another: not only the proportional numbers of the
heath-plants were wholly changed, but twelve species of plants (not
counting grasses and carices) flourished in the plantations, which could
not be found on the heath. The effect on the insects must have been
still greater, for six insectivorous birds were very common in the
plantations, which were not to be seen on the heath; and the heath was
frequented by two or three distinct insectivorous birds. Here we see how
potent has been the effect of the introduction of a single tree, nothing
whatever else having been done, with the exception of the land having
been enclosed, so that cattle could not enter. But how important an
element enclosure is, I plainly saw near Farnham, in Surrey. Here
there are extensive heaths, with a few clumps of old Scotch firs on
the distant hill-tops: within the last ten years large spaces have been
enclosed, and self-sown firs are now springing up in multitudes, so
close together that all cannot live. When I ascertained that these young
trees had not been sown or planted I was so much surprised at their
numbers that I went to several points of view, whence I could examine
hundreds of acres of the unenclosed heath, and literally I could not
see a single Scotch fir, except the old planted clumps. But on looking
closely between the stems of the heath, I found a multitude of seedlings
and little trees, which had been perpetually browsed down by the cattle.
In one square yard, at a point some hundred yards distant from one of
the old clumps, I counted thirty-two little trees; and one of them, with
twenty-six rings of growth, had, during many years tried to raise its
head above the stems of the heath, and had failed. No wonder that, as
soon as the land was enclosed, it became thickly clothed with vigorously
growing young firs. Yet the heath was so extremely barren and so
extensive that no one would ever have imagined that cattle would have so
closely and effectually searched it for food.

Here we see that cattle absolutely determine the existence of the Scotch
fir; but in several parts of the world insects determine the existence
of cattle. Perhaps Paraguay offers the most curious instance of this;
for here neither cattle nor horses nor dogs have ever run wild, though
they swarm southward and northward in a feral state; and Azara and
Rengger have shown that this is caused by the greater number in Paraguay
of a certain fly, which lays its eggs in the navels of these animals
when first born. The increase of these flies, numerous as they are,
must be habitually checked by some means, probably by other parasitic
insects. Hence, if certain insectivorous birds were to decrease in
Paraguay, the parasitic insects would probably increase; and this would
lessen the number of the navel-frequenting flies--then cattle and horses
would become feral, and this would certainly greatly alter (as indeed
I have observed in parts of South America) the vegetation: this again
would largely affect the insects; and this, as we have just seen
in Staffordshire, the insectivorous birds, and so onwards in
ever-increasing circles of complexity. Not that under nature the
relations will ever be as simple as this. Battle within battle must be
continually recurring with varying success; and yet in the long-run the
forces are so nicely balanced that the face of nature remains for long
periods of time uniform, though assuredly the merest trifle would give
the victory to one organic being over another. Nevertheless, so profound
is our ignorance, and so high our presumption, that we marvel when we
hear of the extinction of an organic being; and as we do not see the
cause, we invoke cataclysms to desolate the world, or invent laws on the
duration of the forms of life!

I am tempted to give one more instance showing how plants and animals,
remote in the scale of nature, are bound together by a web of complex
relations. I shall hereafter have occasion to show that the exotic
Lobelia fulgens is never visited in my garden by insects, and
consequently, from its peculiar structure, never sets a seed. Nearly
all our orchidaceous plants absolutely require the visits of insects
to remove their pollen-masses and thus to fertilise them. I find
from experiments that humble-bees are almost indispensable to the
fertilisation of the heartsease (Viola tricolor), for other bees do
not visit this flower. I have also found that the visits of bees are
necessary for the fertilisation of some kinds of clover; for instance
twenty heads of Dutch clover (Trifolium repens) yielded 2,290 seeds, but
twenty other heads, protected from bees, produced not one. Again, 100
heads of red clover (T. pratense) produced 2,700 seeds, but the same
number of protected heads produced not a single seed. Humble bees alone
visit red clover, as other bees cannot reach the nectar. It has been
suggested that moths may fertilise the clovers; but I doubt whether they
could do so in the case of the red clover, from their weight not being
sufficient to depress the wing petals. Hence we may infer as highly
probable that, if the whole genus of humble-bees became extinct or very
rare in England, the heartsease and red clover would become very rare,
or wholly disappear. The number of humble-bees in any district depends
in a great measure upon the number of field-mice, which destroy their
combs and nests; and Colonel Newman, who has long attended to the habits
of humble-bees, believes that "more than two-thirds of them are
thus destroyed all over England." Now the number of mice is largely
dependent, as every one knows, on the number of cats; and Colonel
Newman says, "Near villages and small towns I have found the nests
of humble-bees more numerous than elsewhere, which I attribute to the
number of cats that destroy the mice." Hence it is quite credible that
the presence of a feline animal in large numbers in a district might
determine, through the intervention first of mice and then of bees, the
frequency of certain flowers in that district!

In the case of every species, many different checks, acting at different
periods of life, and during different seasons or years, probably come
into play; some one check or some few being generally the most potent,
but all will concur in determining the average number, or even
the existence of the species. In some cases it can be shown that
widely-different checks act on the same species in different districts.
When we look at the plants and bushes clothing an entangled bank, we
are tempted to attribute their proportional numbers and kinds to what we
call chance. But how false a view is this! Every one has heard that when
an American forest is cut down, a very different vegetation springs
up; but it has been observed that ancient Indian ruins in the Southern
United States, which must formerly have been cleared of trees, now
display the same beautiful diversity and proportion of kinds as in the
surrounding virgin forests. What a struggle must have gone on during
long centuries between the several kinds of trees, each annually
scattering its seeds by the thousand; what war between insect and
insect--between insects, snails, and other animals with birds and beasts
of prey--all striving to increase, all feeding on each other, or on the
trees, their seeds and seedlings, or on the other plants which first
clothed the ground and thus checked the growth of the trees. Throw up
a handful of feathers, and all fall to the ground according to definite
laws; but how simple is the problem where each shall fall compared to
that of the action and reaction of the innumerable plants and animals
which have determined, in the course of centuries, the proportional
numbers and kinds of trees now growing on the old Indian ruins!

The dependency of one organic being on another, as of a parasite on its
prey, lies generally between beings remote in the scale of nature. This
is likewise sometimes the case with those which may strictly be said to
struggle with each other for existence, as in the case of locusts and
grass-feeding quadrupeds. But the struggle will almost invariably
be most severe between the individuals of the same species, for they
frequent the same districts, require the same food, and are exposed
to the same dangers. In the case of varieties of the same species, the
struggle will generally be almost equally severe, and we sometimes see
the contest soon decided: for instance, if several varieties of wheat be
sown together, and the mixed seed be resown, some of the varieties which
best suit the soil or climate, or are naturally the most fertile, will
beat the others and so yield more seed, and will consequently in a few
years supplant the other varieties. To keep up a mixed stock of even
such extremely close varieties as the variously coloured sweet-peas,
they must be each year harvested separately, and the seed then mixed
in due proportion, otherwise the weaker kinds will steadily decrease in
number and disappear. So again with the varieties of sheep: it has
been asserted that certain mountain-varieties will starve out other
mountain-varieties, so that they cannot be kept together. The same
result has followed from keeping together different varieties of the
medicinal leech. It may even be doubted whether the varieties of any
of our domestic plants or animals have so exactly the same strength,
habits, and constitution, that the original proportions of a mixed
stock (crossing being prevented) could be kept up for half-a-dozen
generations, if they were allowed to struggle together, in the same
manner as beings in a state of nature, and if the seed or young were not
annually preserved in due proportion.

STRUGGLE FOR LIFE MOST SEVERE BETWEEN INDIVIDUALS AND VARIETIES OF THE
SAME SPECIES.

As the species of the same genus usually have, though by no means
invariably, much similarity in habits and constitution, and always in
structure, the struggle will generally be more severe between them, if
they come into competition with each other, than between the species of
distinct genera. We see this in the recent extension over parts of the
United States of one species of swallow having caused the decrease of
another species. The recent increase of the missel-thrush in parts of
Scotland has caused the decrease of the song-thrush. How frequently we
hear of one species of rat taking the place of another species under
the most different climates! In Russia the small Asiatic cockroach
has everywhere driven before it its great congener. In Australia the
imported hive-bee is rapidly exterminating the small, stingless native
bee. One species of charlock has been known to supplant another species;
and so in other cases. We can dimly see why the competition should be
most severe between allied forms, which fill nearly the same place in
the economy of nature; but probably in no one case could we precisely
say why one species has been victorious over another in the great battle
of life.

A corollary of the highest importance may be deduced from the foregoing
remarks, namely, that the structure of every organic being is related,
in the most essential yet often hidden manner, to that of all other
organic beings, with which it comes into competition for food or
residence, or from which it has to escape, or on which it preys. This
is obvious in the structure of the teeth and talons of the tiger; and in
that of the legs and claws of the parasite which clings to the hair on
the tiger's body. But in the beautifully plumed seed of the dandelion,
and in the flattened and fringed legs of the water-beetle, the relation
seems at first confined to the elements of air and water. Yet the
advantage of the plumed seeds no doubt stands in the closest relation
to the land being already thickly clothed with other plants; so that the
seeds may be widely distributed and fall on unoccupied ground. In the
water-beetle, the structure of its legs, so well adapted for diving,
allows it to compete with other aquatic insects, to hunt for its own
prey, and to escape serving as prey to other animals.

The store of nutriment laid up within the seeds of many plants seems at
first sight to have no sort of relation to other plants. But from the
strong growth of young plants produced from such seeds, as peas and
beans, when sown in the midst of long grass, it may be suspected that
the chief use of the nutriment in the seed is to favour the growth of
the seedlings, whilst struggling with other plants growing vigorously
all around.

Look at a plant in the midst of its range! Why does it not double or
quadruple its numbers? We know that it can perfectly well withstand a
little more heat or cold, dampness or dryness, for elsewhere it ranges
into slightly hotter or colder, damper or drier districts. In this case
we can clearly see that if we wish in imagination to give the plant the
power of increasing in numbers, we should have to give it some advantage
over its competitors, or over the animals which prey on it. On the
confines of its geographical range, a change of constitution with
respect to climate would clearly be an advantage to our plant; but we
have reason to believe that only a few plants or animals range so far,
that they are destroyed exclusively by the rigour of the climate. Not
until we reach the extreme confines of life, in the Arctic regions or on
the borders of an utter desert, will competition cease. The land may be
extremely cold or dry, yet there will be competition between some few
species, or between the individuals of the same species, for the warmest
or dampest spots.

Hence we can see that when a plant or animal is placed in a new country,
among new competitors, the conditions of its life will generally be
changed in an essential manner, although the climate may be exactly the
same as in its former home. If its average numbers are to increase in
its new home, we should have to modify it in a different way to what we
should have had to do in its native country; for we should have to give
it some advantage over a different set of competitors or enemies.

It is good thus to try in imagination to give any one species an
advantage over another. Probably in no single instance should we know
what to do. This ought to convince us of our ignorance on the mutual
relations of all organic beings; a conviction as necessary, as it is
difficult to acquire. All that we can do is to keep steadily in mind
that each organic being is striving to increase in a geometrical ratio;
that each, at some period of its life, during some season of the year,
during each generation, or at intervals, has to struggle for life and
to suffer great destruction. When we reflect on this struggle we may
console ourselves with the full belief that the war of nature is not
incessant, that no fear is felt, that death is generally prompt, and
that the vigorous, the healthy, and the happy survive and multiply.




CHAPTER IV. NATURAL SELECTION; OR THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST.

 Natural Selection--its power compared with man's selection--its power
 on characters of trifling importance--its power at all ages and on
 both sexes--Sexual Selection--On the generality of intercrosses
 between individuals of the same species--Circumstances favourable and
 unfavourable to the results of Natural Selection, namely, intercrossing,
 isolation, number of individuals--Slow action--Extinction caused by
 Natural Selection--Divergence of Character, related to the diversity of
 inhabitants of any small area and to naturalisation--Action of Natural
 Selection, through Divergence of Character and Extinction, on the
 descendants from a common parent--Explains the Grouping of all organic
 beings--Advance in organisation--Low forms preserved--Convergence of
 character--Indefinite multiplication of species--Summary.


How will the struggle for existence, briefly discussed in the last
chapter, act in regard to variation? Can the principle of selection,
which we have seen is so potent in the hands of man, apply under nature?
I think we shall see that it can act most efficiently. Let the endless
number of slight variations and individual differences occurring in our
domestic productions, and, in a lesser degree, in those under nature, be
borne in mind; as well as the strength of the hereditary tendency. Under
domestication, it may truly be said that the whole organisation becomes
in some degree plastic. But the variability, which we almost universally
meet with in our domestic productions is not directly produced, as
Hooker and Asa Gray have well remarked, by man; he can neither originate
varieties nor prevent their occurrence; he can only preserve and
accumulate such as do occur. Unintentionally he exposes organic beings
to new and changing conditions of life, and variability ensues; but
similar changes of conditions might and do occur under nature. Let it
also be borne in mind how infinitely complex and close-fitting are
the mutual relations of all organic beings to each other and to their
physical conditions of life; and consequently what infinitely varied
diversities of structure might be of use to each being under changing
conditions of life. Can it then be thought improbable, seeing that
variations useful to man have undoubtedly occurred, that other
variations useful in some way to each being in the great and complex
battle of life, should occur in the course of many successive
generations? If such do occur, can we doubt (remembering that many more
individuals are born than can possibly survive) that individuals having
any advantage, however slight, over others, would have the best chance
of surviving and procreating their kind? On the other hand, we may feel
sure that any variation in the least degree injurious would be rigidly
destroyed. This preservation of favourable individual differences and
variations, and the destruction of those which are injurious, I have
called Natural Selection, or the Survival of the Fittest. Variations
neither useful nor injurious would not be affected by natural selection,
and would be left either a fluctuating element, as perhaps we see in
certain polymorphic species, or would ultimately become fixed, owing to
the nature of the organism and the nature of the conditions.

Several writers have misapprehended or objected to the term Natural
Selection. Some have even imagined that natural selection induces
variability, whereas it implies only the preservation of such variations
as arise and are beneficial to the being under its conditions of life.
No one objects to agriculturists speaking of the potent effects of man's
selection; and in this case the individual differences given by nature,
which man for some object selects, must of necessity first occur. Others
have objected that the term selection implies conscious choice in the
animals which become modified; and it has even been urged that, as
plants have no volition, natural selection is not applicable to them!
In the literal sense of the word, no doubt, natural selection is a
false term; but who ever objected to chemists speaking of the elective
affinities of the various elements?--and yet an acid cannot strictly be
said to elect the base with which it in preference combines. It has been
said that I speak of natural selection as an active power or Deity; but
who objects to an author speaking of the attraction of gravity as ruling
the movements of the planets? Every one knows what is meant and is
implied by such metaphorical expressions; and they are almost necessary
for brevity. So again it is difficult to avoid personifying the word
Nature; but I mean by nature, only the aggregate action and product of
many natural laws, and by laws the sequence of events as ascertained
by us. With a little familiarity such superficial objections will be
forgotten.

We shall best understand the probable course of natural selection by
taking the case of a country undergoing some slight physical change, for
instance, of climate. The proportional numbers of its inhabitants will
almost immediately undergo a change, and some species will probably
become extinct. We may conclude, from what we have seen of the intimate
and complex manner in which the inhabitants of each country are
bound together, that any change in the numerical proportions of the
inhabitants, independently of the change of climate itself, would
seriously affect the others. If the country were open on its borders,
new forms would certainly immigrate, and this would likewise seriously
disturb the relations of some of the former inhabitants. Let it be
remembered how powerful the influence of a single introduced tree or
mammal has been shown to be. But in the case of an island, or of a
country partly surrounded by barriers, into which new and better adapted
forms could not freely enter, we should then have places in the economy
of nature which would assuredly be better filled up if some of the
original inhabitants were in some manner modified; for, had the area
been open to immigration, these same places would have been seized on
by intruders. In such cases, slight modifications, which in any way
favoured the individuals of any species, by better adapting them to
their altered conditions, would tend to be preserved; and natural
selection would have free scope for the work of improvement.

We have good reason to believe, as shown in the first chapter,
that changes in the conditions of life give a tendency to increased
variability; and in the foregoing cases the conditions the changed, and
this would manifestly be favourable to natural selection, by affording
a better chance of the occurrence of profitable variations. Unless such
occur, natural selection can do nothing. Under the term of "variations,"
it must never be forgotten that mere individual differences are
included. As man can produce a great result with his domestic animals
and plants by adding up in any given direction individual differences,
so could natural selection, but far more easily from having incomparably
longer time for action. Nor do I believe that any great physical change,
as of climate, or any unusual degree of isolation, to check immigration,
is necessary in order that new and unoccupied places should be left
for natural selection to fill up by improving some of the varying
inhabitants. For as all the inhabitants of each country are struggling
together with nicely balanced forces, extremely slight modifications in
the structure or habits of one species would often give it an advantage
over others; and still further modifications of the same kind would
often still further increase the advantage, as long as the species
continued under the same conditions of life and profited by similar
means of subsistence and defence. No country can be named in which all
the native inhabitants are now so perfectly adapted to each other and to
the physical conditions under which they live, that none of them could
be still better adapted or improved; for in all countries, the natives
have been so far conquered by naturalised productions that they have
allowed some foreigners to take firm possession of the land. And as
foreigners have thus in every country beaten some of the natives, we
may safely conclude that the natives might have been modified with
advantage, so as to have better resisted the intruders.

As man can produce, and certainly has produced, a great result by his
methodical and unconscious means of selection, what may not natural
selection effect? Man can act only on external and visible characters:
Nature, if I may be allowed to personify the natural preservation or
survival of the fittest, cares nothing for appearances, except in so far
as they are useful to any being. She can act on every internal organ,
on every shade of constitutional difference, on the whole machinery of
life. Man selects only for his own good; Nature only for that of the
being which she tends. Every selected character is fully exercised by
her, as is implied by the fact of their selection. Man keeps the natives
of many climates in the same country. He seldom exercises each selected
character in some peculiar and fitting manner; he feeds a long and a
short-beaked pigeon on the same food; he does not exercise a long-backed
or long-legged quadruped in any peculiar manner; he exposes sheep
with long and short wool to the same climate; does not allow the most
vigorous males to struggle for the females; he does not rigidly destroy
all inferior animals, but protects during each varying season, as far as
lies in his power, all his productions. He often begins his selection
by some half-monstrous form, or at least by some modification prominent
enough to catch the eye or to be plainly useful to him. Under nature,
the slightest differences of structure or constitution may well turn the
nicely-balanced scale in the struggle for life, and so be preserved.
How fleeting are the wishes and efforts of man! How short his time,
and consequently how poor will be his results, compared with those
accumulated by Nature during whole geological periods! Can we wonder,
then, that Nature's productions should be far "truer" in character than
man's productions; that they should be infinitely better adapted to the
most complex conditions of life, and should plainly bear the stamp of
far higher workmanship?

It may metaphorically be said that natural selection is daily and hourly
scrutinising, throughout the world, the slightest variations; rejecting
those that are bad, preserving and adding up all that are good; silently
and insensibly working, WHENEVER AND WHEREVER OPPORTUNITY OFFERS, at
the improvement of each organic being in relation to its organic and
inorganic conditions of life. We see nothing of these slow changes in
progress, until the hand of time has marked the long lapse of ages, and
then so imperfect is our view into long-past geological ages that we see
only that the forms of life are now different from what they formerly
were.

In order that any great amount of modification should be effected in a
species, a variety, when once formed must again, perhaps after a long
interval of time, vary or present individual differences of the same
favourable nature as before; and these must again be preserved, and so
onward, step by step. Seeing that individual differences of the
same kind perpetually recur, this can hardly be considered as an
unwarrantable assumption. But whether it is true, we can judge only
by seeing how far the hypothesis accords with and explains the general
phenomena of nature. On the other hand, the ordinary belief that the
amount of possible variation is a strictly limited quantity, is likewise
a simple assumption.

Although natural selection can act only through and for the good of each
being, yet characters and structures, which we are apt to consider as of
very trifling importance, may thus be acted on. When we see leaf-eating
insects green, and bark-feeders mottled-grey; the alpine ptarmigan white
in winter, the red-grouse the colour of heather, we must believe that
these tints are of service to these birds and insects in preserving them
from danger. Grouse, if not destroyed at some period of their lives,
would increase in countless numbers; they are known to suffer largely
from birds of prey; and hawks are guided by eyesight to their prey,--so
much so that on parts of the continent persons are warned not to keep
white pigeons, as being the most liable to destruction. Hence natural
selection might be effective in giving the proper colour to each kind
of grouse, and in keeping that colour, when once acquired, true and
constant. Nor ought we to think that the occasional destruction of an
animal of any particular colour would produce little effect; we should
remember how essential it is in a flock of white sheep to destroy a lamb
with the faintest trace of black. We have seen how the colour of hogs,
which feed on the "paint-root" in Virginia, determines whether they
shall live or die. In plants, the down on the fruit and the colour of
the flesh are considered by botanists as characters of the most trifling
importance; yet we hear from an excellent horticulturist, Downing,
that in the United States smooth-skinned fruits suffer far more from a
beetle, a Curculio, than those with down; that purple plums suffer far
more from a certain disease than yellow plums; whereas another disease
attacks yellow-fleshed peaches far more than those with other coloured
flesh. If, with all the aids of art, these slight differences make a
great difference in cultivating the several varieties, assuredly, in a
state of nature, where the trees would have to struggle with other trees
and with a host of enemies, such differences would effectually settle
which variety, whether a smooth or downy, a yellow or a purple-fleshed
fruit, should succeed.

In looking at many small points of difference between species, which,
as far as our ignorance permits us to judge, seem quite unimportant, we
must not forget that climate, food, etc., have no doubt produced some
direct effect. It is also necessary to bear in mind that, owing to
the law of correlation, when one part varies and the variations are
accumulated through natural selection, other modifications, often of the
most unexpected nature, will ensue.

As we see that those variations which, under domestication, appear at
any particular period of life, tend to reappear in the offspring at the
same period; for instance, in the shape, size and flavour of the seeds
of the many varieties of our culinary and agricultural plants; in the
caterpillar and cocoon stages of the varieties of the silkworm; in the
eggs of poultry, and in the colour of the down of their chickens; in the
horns of our sheep and cattle when nearly adult; so in a state of nature
natural selection will be enabled to act on and modify organic beings at
any age, by the accumulation of variations profitable at that age, and
by their inheritance at a corresponding age. If it profit a plant to
have its seeds more and more widely disseminated by the wind, I can see
no greater difficulty in this being effected through natural selection,
than in the cotton-planter increasing and improving by selection the
down in the pods on his cotton-trees. Natural selection may modify
and adapt the larva of an insect to a score of contingencies, wholly
different from those which concern the mature insect; and these
modifications may affect, through correlation, the structure of the
adult. So, conversely, modifications in the adult may affect the
structure of the larva; but in all cases natural selection will ensure
that they shall not be injurious: for if they were so, the species would
become extinct.

Natural selection will modify the structure of the young in relation to
the parent and of the parent in relation to the young. In social animals
it will adapt the structure of each individual for the benefit of the
whole community; if the community profits by the selected change. What
natural selection cannot do, is to modify the structure of one species,
without giving it any advantage, for the good of another species;
and though statements to this effect may be found in works of natural
history, I cannot find one case which will bear investigation. A
structure used only once in an animal's life, if of high importance to
it, might be modified to any extent by natural selection; for instance,
the great jaws possessed by certain insects, used exclusively for
opening the cocoon--or the hard tip to the beak of unhatched birds,
used for breaking the eggs. It has been asserted, that of the best
short-beaked tumbler-pigeons a greater number perish in the egg than are
able to get out of it; so that fanciers assist in the act of hatching.
Now, if nature had to make the beak of a full-grown pigeon very short
for the bird's own advantage, the process of modification would be very
slow, and there would be simultaneously the most rigorous selection
of all the young birds within the egg, which had the most powerful and
hardest beaks, for all with weak beaks would inevitably perish: or, more
delicate and more easily broken shells might be selected, the thickness
of the shell being known to vary like every other structure.

It may be well here to remark that with all beings there must be much
fortuitous destruction, which can have little or no influence on the
course of natural selection. For instance, a vast number of eggs or
seeds are annually devoured, and these could be modified through natural
selection only if they varied in some manner which protected them from
their enemies. Yet many of these eggs or seeds would perhaps, if not
destroyed, have yielded individuals better adapted to their conditions
of life than any of those which happened to survive. So again a vast
number of mature animals and plants, whether or not they be the best
adapted to their conditions, must be annually destroyed by accidental
causes, which would not be in the least degree mitigated by certain
changes of structure or constitution which would in other ways be
beneficial to the species. But let the destruction of the adults be ever
so heavy, if the number which can exist in any district be not wholly
kept down by such causes--or again let the destruction of eggs or
seeds be so great that only a hundredth or a thousandth part are
developed--yet of those which do survive, the best adapted individuals,
supposing that there is any variability in a favourable direction,
will tend to propagate their kind in larger numbers than the less
well adapted. If the numbers be wholly kept down by the causes just
indicated, as will often have been the case, natural selection will
be powerless in certain beneficial directions; but this is no valid
objection to its efficiency at other times and in other ways; for we
are far from having any reason to suppose that many species ever undergo
modification and improvement at the same time in the same area.

SEXUAL SELECTION.

Inasmuch as peculiarities often appear under domestication in one sex
and become hereditarily attached to that sex, so no doubt it will be
under nature. Thus it is rendered possible for the two sexes to be
modified through natural selection in relation to different habits
of life, as is sometimes the case; or for one sex to be modified in
relation to the other sex, as commonly occurs. This leads me to say a
few words on what I have called sexual selection. This form of selection
depends, not on a struggle for existence in relation to other organic
beings or to external conditions, but on a struggle between the
individuals of one sex, generally the males, for the possession of the
other sex. The result is not death to the unsuccessful competitor, but
few or no offspring. Sexual selection is, therefore, less rigorous than
natural selection. Generally, the most vigorous males, those which are
best fitted for their places in nature, will leave most progeny. But in
many cases victory depends not so much on general vigour, but on having
special weapons, confined to the male sex. A hornless stag or spurless
cock would have a poor chance of leaving numerous offspring. Sexual
selection, by always allowing the victor to breed, might surely give
indomitable courage, length of spur, and strength to the wing to
strike in the spurred leg, in nearly the same manner as does the brutal
cockfighter by the careful selection of his best cocks. How low in the
scale of nature the law of battle descends I know not; male alligators
have been described as fighting, bellowing, and whirling round, like
Indians in a war-dance, for the possession of the females; male salmons
have been observed fighting all day long; male stag-beetles sometimes
bear wounds from the huge mandibles of other males; the males of certain
hymenopterous insects have been frequently seen by that inimitable
observer M. Fabre, fighting for a particular female who sits by, an
apparently unconcerned beholder of the struggle, and then retires
with the conqueror. The war is, perhaps, severest between the males
of polygamous animals, and these seem oftenest provided with special
weapons. The males of carnivorous animals are already well armed; though
to them and to others, special means of defence may be given through
means of sexual selection, as the mane of the lion, and the hooked jaw
to the male salmon; for the shield may be as important for victory as
the sword or spear.

Among birds, the contest is often of a more peaceful character. All
those who have attended to the subject, believe that there is the
severest rivalry between the males of many species to attract, by
singing, the females. The rock-thrush of Guiana, birds of paradise,
and some others, congregate, and successive males display with the most
elaborate care, and show off in the best manner, their gorgeous plumage;
they likewise perform strange antics before the females, which, standing
by as spectators, at last choose the most attractive partner. Those who
have closely attended to birds in confinement well know that they
often take individual preferences and dislikes: thus Sir R. Heron has
described how a pied peacock was eminently attractive to all his hen
birds. I cannot here enter on the necessary details; but if man can in a
short time give beauty and an elegant carriage to his bantams, according
to his standard of beauty, I can see no good reason to doubt that female
birds, by selecting, during thousands of generations, the most melodious
or beautiful males, according to their standard of beauty, might produce
a marked effect. Some well-known laws, with respect to the plumage of
male and female birds, in comparison with the plumage of the young, can
partly be explained through the action of sexual selection on variations
occurring at different ages, and transmitted to the males alone or to
both sexes at corresponding ages; but I have not space here to enter on
this subject.

Thus it is, as I believe, that when the males and females of any animal
have the same general habits of life, but differ in structure, colour,
or ornament, such differences have been mainly caused by sexual
selection: that is, by individual males having had, in successive
generations, some slight advantage over other males, in their weapons,
means of defence, or charms; which they have transmitted to their
male offspring alone. Yet, I would not wish to attribute all sexual
differences to this agency: for we see in our domestic animals
peculiarities arising and becoming attached to the male sex, which
apparently have not been augmented through selection by man. The tuft of
hair on the breast of the wild turkey-cock cannot be of any use, and it
is doubtful whether it can be ornamental in the eyes of the female bird;
indeed, had the tuft appeared under domestication it would have been
called a monstrosity.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE ACTION OF NATURAL SELECTION, OR THE SURVIVAL OF THE
FITTEST.

In order to make it clear how, as I believe, natural selection acts, I
must beg permission to give one or two imaginary illustrations. Let us
take the case of a wolf, which preys on various animals, securing some
by craft, some by strength, and some by fleetness; and let us suppose
that the fleetest prey, a deer for instance, had from any change in
the country increased in numbers, or that other prey had decreased
in numbers, during that season of the year when the wolf was hardest
pressed for food. Under such circumstances the swiftest and slimmest
wolves have the best chance of surviving, and so be preserved or
selected, provided always that they retained strength to master their
prey at this or some other period of the year, when they were compelled
to prey on other animals. I can see no more reason to doubt that
this would be the result, than that man should be able to improve the
fleetness of his greyhounds by careful and methodical selection, or by
that kind of unconscious selection which follows from each man trying to
keep the best dogs without any thought of modifying the breed. I may
add that, according to Mr. Pierce, there are two varieties of the wolf
inhabiting the Catskill Mountains, in the United States, one with a
light greyhound-like form, which pursues deer, and the other more bulky,
with shorter legs, which more frequently attacks the shepherd's flocks.

Even without any change in the proportional numbers of the animals on
which our wolf preyed, a cub might be born with an innate tendency to
pursue certain kinds of prey. Nor can this be thought very improbable;
for we often observe great differences in the natural tendencies of our
domestic animals; one cat, for instance, taking to catch rats, another
mice; one cat, according to Mr. St. John, bringing home winged game,
another hares or rabbits, and another hunting on marshy ground and
almost nightly catching woodcocks or snipes. The tendency to catch rats
rather than mice is known to be inherited. Now, if any slight innate
change of habit or of structure benefited an individual wolf, it would
have the best chance of surviving and of leaving offspring. Some of its
young would probably inherit the same habits or structure, and by the
repetition of this process, a new variety might be formed which would
either supplant or coexist with the parent-form of wolf. Or, again,
the wolves inhabiting a mountainous district, and those frequenting the
lowlands, would naturally be forced to hunt different prey; and from the
continued preservation of the individuals best fitted for the two sites,
two varieties might slowly be formed. These varieties would cross and
blend where they met; but to this subject of intercrossing we shall soon
have to return. I may add, that, according to Mr. Pierce, there are two
varieties of the wolf inhabiting the Catskill Mountains in the United
States, one with a light greyhound-like form, which pursues deer, and
the other more bulky, with shorter legs, which more frequently attacks
the shepherd's flocks.

It should be observed that in the above illustration, I speak of the
slimmest individual wolves, and not of any single strongly marked
variation having been preserved. In former editions of this work I
sometimes spoke as if this latter alternative had frequently occurred.
I saw the great importance of individual differences, and this led me
fully to discuss the results of unconscious selection by man,
which depends on the preservation of all the more or less valuable
individuals, and on the destruction of the worst. I saw, also, that
the preservation in a state of nature of any occasional deviation of
structure, such as a monstrosity, would be a rare event; and that, if at
first preserved, it would generally be lost by subsequent intercrossing
with ordinary individuals. Nevertheless, until reading an able and
valuable article in the "North British Review" (1867), I did not
appreciate how rarely single variations, whether slight or strongly
marked, could be perpetuated. The author takes the case of a pair of
animals, producing during their lifetime two hundred offspring, of
which, from various causes of destruction, only two on an average
survive to pro-create their kind. This is rather an extreme estimate
for most of the higher animals, but by no means so for many of the lower
organisms. He then shows that if a single individual were born, which
varied in some manner, giving it twice as good a chance of life as that
of the other individuals, yet the chances would be strongly against its
survival. Supposing it to survive and to breed, and that half its young
inherited the favourable variation; still, as the Reviewer goes onto
show, the young would have only a slightly better chance of surviving
and breeding; and this chance would go on decreasing in the succeeding
generations. The justice of these remarks cannot, I think, be disputed.
If, for instance, a bird of some kind could procure its food more easily
by having its beak curved, and if one were born with its beak strongly
curved, and which consequently flourished, nevertheless there would be
a very poor chance of this one individual perpetuating its kind to the
exclusion of the common form; but there can hardly be a doubt, judging
by what we see taking place under domestication, that this result would
follow from the preservation during many generations of a large number
of individuals with more or less strongly curved beaks, and from the
destruction of a still larger number with the straightest beaks.

It should not, however, be overlooked that certain rather strongly
marked variations, which no one would rank as mere individual
differences, frequently recur owing to a similar organisation being
similarly acted on--of which fact numerous instances could be given with
our domestic productions. In such cases, if the varying individual did
not actually transmit to its offspring its newly-acquired character, it
would undoubtedly transmit to them, as long as the existing conditions
remained the same, a still stronger tendency to vary in the same manner.
There can also be little doubt that the tendency to vary in the same
manner has often been so strong that all the individuals of the same
species have been similarly modified without the aid of any form of
selection. Or only a third, fifth, or tenth part of the individuals may
have been thus affected, of which fact several instances could be given.
Thus Graba estimates that about one-fifth of the guillemots in the Faroe
Islands consist of a variety so well marked, that it was formerly ranked
as a distinct species under the name of Uria lacrymans. In cases of this
kind, if the variation were of a beneficial nature, the original form
would soon be supplanted by the modified form, through the survival of
the fittest.

To the effects of intercrossing in eliminating variations of all kinds,
I shall have to recur; but it may be here remarked that most animals and
plants keep to their proper homes, and do not needlessly wander about;
we see this even with migratory birds, which almost always return to the
same spot. Consequently each newly-formed variety would generally be at
first local, as seems to be the common rule with varieties in a state
of nature; so that similarly modified individuals would soon exist in a
small body together, and would often breed together. If the new variety
were successful in its battle for life, it would slowly spread from
a central district, competing with and conquering the unchanged
individuals on the margins of an ever-increasing circle.

It may be worth while to give another and more complex illustration of
the action of natural selection. Certain plants excrete sweet juice,
apparently for the sake of eliminating something injurious from the sap:
this is effected, for instance, by glands at the base of the stipules in
some Leguminosae, and at the backs of the leaves of the common laurel.
This juice, though small in quantity, is greedily sought by insects; but
their visits do not in any way benefit the plant. Now, let us suppose
that the juice or nectar was excreted from the inside of the flowers of
a certain number of plants of any species. Insects in seeking the nectar
would get dusted with pollen, and would often transport it from one
flower to another. The flowers of two distinct individuals of the same
species would thus get crossed; and the act of crossing, as can be fully
proved, gives rise to vigorous seedlings, which consequently would have
the best chance of flourishing and surviving. The plants which produced
flowers with the largest glands or nectaries, excreting most nectar,
would oftenest be visited by insects, and would oftenest be crossed; and
so in the long-run would gain the upper hand and form a local variety.
The flowers, also, which had their stamens and pistils placed, in
relation to the size and habits of the particular insect which visited
them, so as to favour in any degree the transportal of the pollen, would
likewise be favoured. We might have taken the case of insects visiting
flowers for the sake of collecting pollen instead of nectar; and as
pollen is formed for the sole purpose of fertilisation, its destruction
appears to be a simple loss to the plant; yet if a little pollen
were carried, at first occasionally and then habitually, by the
pollen-devouring insects from flower to flower, and a cross thus
effected, although nine-tenths of the pollen were destroyed it
might still be a great gain to the plant to be thus robbed; and the
individuals which produced more and more pollen, and had larger anthers,
would be selected.

When our plant, by the above process long continued, had been rendered
highly attractive to insects, they would, unintentionally on their part,
regularly carry pollen from flower to flower; and that they do this
effectually I could easily show by many striking facts. I will give only
one, as likewise illustrating one step in the separation of the sexes of
plants. Some holly-trees bear only male flowers, which have four stamens
producing a rather small quantity of pollen, and a rudimentary pistil;
other holly-trees bear only female flowers; these have a full-sized
pistil, and four stamens with shrivelled anthers, in which not a grain
of pollen can be detected. Having found a female tree exactly sixty
yards from a male tree, I put the stigmas of twenty flowers, taken from
different branches, under the microscope, and on all, without exception,
there were a few pollen-grains, and on some a profusion. As the wind had
set for several days from the female to the male tree, the pollen could
not thus have been carried. The weather had been cold and boisterous and
therefore not favourable to bees, nevertheless every female flower which
I examined had been effectually fertilised by the bees, which had flown
from tree to tree in search of nectar. But to return to our imaginary
case; as soon as the plant had been rendered so highly attractive to
insects that pollen was regularly carried from flower to flower, another
process might commence. No naturalist doubts the advantage of what has
been called the "physiological division of labour;" hence we may believe
that it would be advantageous to a plant to produce stamens alone in one
flower or on one whole plant, and pistils alone in another flower or on
another plant. In plants under culture and placed under new conditions
of life, sometimes the male organs and sometimes the female organs
become more or less impotent; now if we suppose this to occur in ever
so slight a degree under nature, then, as pollen is already carried
regularly from flower to flower, and as a more complete separation of
the sexes of our plant would be advantageous on the principle of
the division of labour, individuals with this tendency more and more
increased, would be continually favoured or selected, until at last a
complete separation of the sexes might be effected. It would take up
too much space to show the various steps, through dimorphism and other
means, by which the separation of the sexes in plants of various kinds
is apparently now in progress; but I may add that some of the species
of holly in North America are, according to Asa Gray, in an exactly
intermediate condition, or, as he expresses it, are more or less
dioeciously polygamous.

Let us now turn to the nectar-feeding insects; we may suppose the
plant of which we have been slowly increasing the nectar by continued
selection, to be a common plant; and that certain insects depended in
main part on its nectar for food. I could give many facts showing how
anxious bees are to save time: for instance, their habit of cutting
holes and sucking the nectar at the bases of certain flowers, which with
a very little more trouble they can enter by the mouth. Bearing such
facts in mind, it may be believed that under certain circumstances
individual differences in the curvature or length of the proboscis,
etc., too slight to be appreciated by us, might profit a bee or other
insect, so that certain individuals would be able to obtain their
food more quickly than others; and thus the communities to which they
belonged would flourish and throw off many swarms inheriting the same
peculiarities. The tubes of the corolla of the common red or incarnate
clovers (Trifolium pratense and incarnatum) do not on a hasty glance
appear to differ in length; yet the hive-bee can easily suck the nectar
out of the incarnate clover, but not out of the common red clover, which
is visited by humble-bees alone; so that whole fields of the red clover
offer in vain an abundant supply of precious nectar to the hive-bee.
That this nectar is much liked by the hive-bee is certain; for I have
repeatedly seen, but only in the autumn, many hive-bees sucking the
flowers through holes bitten in the base of the tube by humble bees.
The difference in the length of the corolla in the two kinds of clover,
which determines the visits of the hive-bee, must be very trifling; for
I have been assured that when red clover has been mown, the flowers of
the second crop are somewhat smaller, and that these are visited by many
hive-bees. I do not know whether this statement is accurate; nor whether
another published statement can be trusted, namely, that the Ligurian
bee, which is generally considered a mere variety of the common
hive-bee, and which freely crosses with it, is able to reach and suck
the nectar of the red clover. Thus, in a country where this kind of
clover abounded, it might be a great advantage to the hive-bee to have a
slightly longer or differently constructed proboscis. On the other hand,
as the fertility of this clover absolutely depends on bees visiting the
flowers, if humble-bees were to become rare in any country, it might be
a great advantage to the plant to have a shorter or more deeply divided
corolla, so that the hive-bees should be enabled to suck its flowers.
Thus I can understand how a flower and a bee might slowly become, either
simultaneously or one after the other, modified and adapted to each
other in the most perfect manner, by the continued preservation of all
the individuals which presented slight deviations of structure mutually
favourable to each other.

I am well aware that this doctrine of natural selection, exemplified in
the above imaginary instances, is open to the same objections which
were first urged against Sir Charles Lyell's noble views on "the modern
changes of the earth, as illustrative of geology;" but we now seldom
hear the agencies which we see still at work, spoken of as trifling and
insignificant, when used in explaining the excavation of the deepest
valleys or the formation of long lines of inland cliffs. Natural
selection acts only by the preservation and accumulation of small
inherited modifications, each profitable to the preserved being; and
as modern geology has almost banished such views as the excavation of a
great valley by a single diluvial wave, so will natural selection banish
the belief of the continued creation of new organic beings, or of any
great and sudden modification in their structure.

ON THE INTERCROSSING OF INDIVIDUALS.

I must here introduce a short digression. In the case of animals
and plants with separated sexes, it is of course obvious that two
individuals must always (with the exception of the curious and not well
understood cases of parthenogenesis) unite for each birth; but in the
case of hermaphrodites this is far from obvious. Nevertheless there is
reason to believe that with all hermaphrodites two individuals, either
occasionally or habitually, concur for the reproduction of their kind.
This view was long ago doubtfully suggested by Sprengel, Knight and
Kolreuter. We shall presently see its importance; but I must here treat
the subject with extreme brevity, though I have the materials prepared
for an ample discussion. All vertebrate animals, all insects and some
other large groups of animals, pair for each birth. Modern research
has much diminished the number of supposed hermaphrodites and of real
hermaphrodites a large number pair; that is, two individuals regularly
unite for reproduction, which is all that concerns us. But still there
are many hermaphrodite animals which certainly do not habitually pair,
and a vast majority of plants are hermaphrodites. What reason, it may be
asked, is there for supposing in these cases that two individuals ever
concur in reproduction? As it is impossible here to enter on details, I
must trust to some general considerations alone.

In the first place, I have collected so large a body of facts, and made
so many experiments, showing, in accordance with the almost universal
belief of breeders, that with animals and plants a cross between
different varieties, or between individuals of the same variety but of
another strain, gives vigour and fertility to the offspring; and on the
other hand, that CLOSE interbreeding diminishes vigour and fertility;
that these facts alone incline me to believe that it is a general law
of nature that no organic being fertilises itself for a perpetuity
of generations; but that a cross with another individual is
occasionally--perhaps at long intervals of time--indispensable.

On the belief that this is a law of nature, we can, I think, understand
several large classes of facts, such as the following, which on any
other view are inexplicable. Every hybridizer knows how unfavourable
exposure to wet is to the fertilisation of a flower, yet what a
multitude of flowers have their anthers and stigmas fully exposed to the
weather! If an occasional cross be indispensable, notwithstanding that
the plant's own anthers and pistil stand so near each other as almost
to ensure self-fertilisation, the fullest freedom for the entrance of
pollen from another individual will explain the above state of exposure
of the organs. Many flowers, on the other hand, have their organs of
fructification closely enclosed, as in the great papilionaceous or
pea-family; but these almost invariably present beautiful and curious
adaptations in relation to the visits of insects. So necessary are the
visits of bees to many papilionaceous flowers, that their fertility is
greatly diminished if these visits be prevented. Now, it is scarcely
possible for insects to fly from flower to flower, and not to carry
pollen from one to the other, to the great good of the plant.
Insects act like a camel-hair pencil, and it is sufficient, to ensure
fertilisation, just to touch with the same brush the anthers of one
flower and then the stigma of another; but it must not be supposed that
bees would thus produce a multitude of hybrids between distinct species;
for if a plant's own pollen and that from another species are placed
on the same stigma, the former is so prepotent that it invariably and
completely destroys, as has been shown by Gartner, the influence of the
foreign pollen.

When the stamens of a flower suddenly spring towards the pistil, or
slowly move one after the other towards it, the contrivance seems
adapted solely to ensure self-fertilisation; and no doubt it is useful
for this end: but the agency of insects is often required to cause the
stamens to spring forward, as Kolreuter has shown to be the case with
the barberry; and in this very genus, which seems to have a special
contrivance for self-fertilisation, it is well known that, if
closely-allied forms or varieties are planted near each other, it is
hardly possible to raise pure seedlings, so largely do they naturally
cross. In numerous other cases, far from self-fertilisation being
favoured, there are special contrivances which effectually prevent the
stigma receiving pollen from its own flower, as I could show from the
works of Sprengel and others, as well as from my own observations: for
instance, in Lobelia fulgens, there is a really beautiful and elaborate
contrivance by which all the infinitely numerous pollen-granules are
swept out of the conjoined anthers of each flower, before the stigma of
that individual flower is ready to receive them; and as this flower is
never visited, at least in my garden, by insects, it never sets a seed,
though by placing pollen from one flower on the stigma of another, I
raise plenty of seedlings. Another species of Lobelia, which is visited
by bees, seeds freely in my garden. In very many other cases, though
there is no special mechanical contrivance to prevent the stigma
receiving pollen from the same flower, yet, as Sprengel, and more
recently Hildebrand and others have shown, and as I can confirm, either
the anthers burst before the stigma is ready for fertilisation, or the
stigma is ready before the pollen of that flower is ready, so that
these so-named dichogamous plants have in fact separated sexes, and
must habitually be crossed. So it is with the reciprocally dimorphic and
trimorphic plants previously alluded to. How strange are these facts!
How strange that the pollen and stigmatic surface of the same flower,
though placed so close together, as if for the very purpose of
self-fertilisation, should be in so many cases mutually useless to each
other! How simply are these facts explained on the view of an occasional
cross with a distinct individual being advantageous or indispensable!

If several varieties of the cabbage, radish, onion, and of some other
plants, be allowed to seed near each other, a large majority of the
seedlings thus raised turn out, as I found, mongrels: for instance, I
raised 233 seedling cabbages from some plants of different varieties
growing near each other, and of these only 78 were true to their kind,
and some even of these were not perfectly true. Yet the pistil of each
cabbage-flower is surrounded not only by its own six stamens but by
those of the many other flowers on the same plant; and the pollen of
each flower readily gets on its stigma without insect agency; for I
have found that plants carefully protected from insects produce the
full number of pods. How, then, comes it that such a vast number of the
seedlings are mongrelized? It must arise from the pollen of a distinct
VARIETY having a prepotent effect over the flower's own pollen; and
that this is part of the general law of good being derived from the
intercrossing of distinct individuals of the same species. When distinct
SPECIES are crossed the case is reversed, for a plant's own pollen
is always prepotent over foreign pollen; but to this subject we shall
return in a future chapter.

In the case of a large tree covered with innumerable flowers, it may be
objected that pollen could seldom be carried from tree to tree, and at
most only from flower to flower on the same tree; and flowers on the
same tree can be considered as distinct individuals only in a limited
sense. I believe this objection to be valid, but that nature has largely
provided against it by giving to trees a strong tendency to bear flowers
with separated sexes. When the sexes are separated, although the male
and female flowers may be produced on the same tree, pollen must be
regularly carried from flower to flower; and this will give a better
chance of pollen being occasionally carried from tree to tree. That
trees belonging to all orders have their sexes more often separated than
other plants, I find to be the case in this country; and at my request
Dr. Hooker tabulated the trees of New Zealand, and Dr. Asa Gray those
of the United States, and the result was as I anticipated. On the
other hand, Dr. Hooker informs me that the rule does not hold good in
Australia: but if most of the Australian trees are dichogamous, the same
result would follow as if they bore flowers with separated sexes. I have
made these few remarks on trees simply to call attention to the subject.

Turning for a brief space to animals: various terrestrial species are
hermaphrodites, such as the land-mollusca and earth-worms; but these
all pair. As yet I have not found a single terrestrial animal which
can fertilise itself. This remarkable fact, which offers so strong a
contrast with terrestrial plants, is intelligible on the view of an
occasional cross being indispensable; for owing to the nature of the
fertilising element there are no means, analogous to the action of
insects and of the wind with plants, by which an occasional cross could
be effected with terrestrial animals without the concurrence of two
individuals. Of aquatic animals, there are many self-fertilising
hermaphrodites; but here the currents of water offer an obvious means
for an occasional cross. As in the case of flowers, I have as yet
failed, after consultation with one of the highest authorities, namely,
Professor Huxley, to discover a single hermaphrodite animal with the
organs of reproduction so perfectly enclosed that access from without,
and the occasional influence of a distinct individual, can be shown to
be physically impossible. Cirripedes long appeared to me to present,
under this point of view, a case of great difficulty; but I have been
enabled, by a fortunate chance, to prove that two individuals, though
both are self-fertilising hermaphrodites, do sometimes cross.

It must have struck most naturalists as a strange anomaly that, both
with animals and plants, some species of the same family and even of
the same genus, though agreeing closely with each other in their whole
organisation, are hermaphrodites, and some unisexual. But if, in fact,
all hermaphrodites do occasionally intercross, the difference between
them and unisexual species is, as far as function is concerned, very
small.

From these several considerations and from the many special facts which
I have collected, but which I am unable here to give, it appears that
with animals and plants an occasional intercross between distinct
individuals is a very general, if not universal, law of nature.

CIRCUMSTANCES FAVOURABLE FOR THE PRODUCTION OF NEW FORMS THROUGH NATURAL
SELECTION.

This is an extremely intricate subject. A great amount of variability,
under which term individual differences are always included, will
evidently be favourable. A large number of individuals, by giving a
better chance within any given period for the appearance of profitable
variations, will compensate for a lesser amount of variability in each
individual, and is, I believe, a highly important element of success.
Though nature grants long periods of time for the work of natural
selection, she does not grant an indefinite period; for as all organic
beings are striving to seize on each place in the economy of nature, if
any one species does not become modified and improved in a corresponding
degree with its competitors it will be exterminated. Unless favourable
variations be inherited by some at least of the offspring, nothing can
be effected by natural selection. The tendency to reversion may often
check or prevent the work; but as this tendency has not prevented man
from forming by selection numerous domestic races, why should it prevail
against natural selection?

In the case of methodical selection, a breeder selects for some definite
object, and if the individuals be allowed freely to intercross, his work
will completely fail. But when many men, without intending to alter
the breed, have a nearly common standard of perfection, and all try to
procure and breed from the best animals, improvement surely but slowly
follows from this unconscious process of selection, notwithstanding that
there is no separation of selected individuals. Thus it will be under
nature; for within a confined area, with some place in the natural
polity not perfectly occupied, all the individuals varying in the right
direction, though in different degrees, will tend to be preserved.
But if the area be large, its several districts will almost certainly
present different conditions of life; and then, if the same species
undergoes modification in different districts, the newly formed
varieties will intercross on the confines of each. But we shall see in
the sixth chapter that intermediate varieties, inhabiting intermediate
districts, will in the long run generally be supplanted by one of the
adjoining varieties. Intercrossing will chiefly affect those animals
which unite for each birth and wander much, and which do not breed at a
very quick rate. Hence with animals of this nature, for instance birds,
varieties will generally be confined to separated countries; and this
I find to be the case. With hermaphrodite organisms which cross only
occasionally, and likewise with animals which unite for each birth, but
which wander little and can increase at a rapid rate, a new and improved
variety might be quickly formed on any one spot, and might there
maintain itself in a body and afterward spread, so that the individuals
of the new variety would chiefly cross together. On this principle
nurserymen always prefer saving seed from a large body of plants, as the
chance of intercrossing is thus lessened.

Even with animals which unite for each birth, and which do not propagate
rapidly, we must not assume that free intercrossing would always
eliminate the effects of natural selection; for I can bring forward
a considerable body of facts showing that within the same area two
varieties of the same animal may long remain distinct, from haunting
different stations, from breeding at slightly different seasons, or from
the individuals of each variety preferring to pair together.

Intercrossing plays a very important part in nature by keeping the
individuals of the same species, or of the same variety, true and
uniform in character. It will obviously thus act far more efficiently
with those animals which unite for each birth; but, as already stated,
we have reason to believe that occasional intercrosses take place with
all animals and plants. Even if these take place only at long intervals
of time, the young thus produced will gain so much in vigour and
fertility over the offspring from long-continued self-fertilisation,
that they will have a better chance of surviving and propagating their
kind; and thus in the long run the influence of crosses, even at rare
intervals, will be great. With respect to organic beings extremely low
in the scale, which do not propagate sexually, nor conjugate, and which
cannot possibly intercross, uniformity of character can be retained by
them under the same conditions of life, only through the principle
of inheritance, and through natural selection which will destroy any
individuals departing from the proper type. If the conditions of life
change and the form undergoes modification, uniformity of character
can be given to the modified offspring, solely by natural selection
preserving similar favourable variations.

Isolation also is an important element in the modification of species
through natural selection. In a confined or isolated area, if not very
large, the organic and inorganic conditions of life will generally be
almost uniform; so that natural selection will tend to modify all
the varying individuals of the same species in the same manner.
Intercrossing with the inhabitants of the surrounding districts,
will also be thus prevented. Moritz Wagner has lately published an
interesting essay on this subject, and has shown that the service
rendered by isolation in preventing crosses between newly-formed
varieties is probably greater even than I supposed. But from reasons
already assigned I can by no means agree with this naturalist, that
migration and isolation are necessary elements for the formation of new
species. The importance of isolation is likewise great in preventing,
after any physical change in the conditions, such as of climate,
elevation of the land, etc., the immigration of better adapted
organisms; and thus new places in the natural economy of the district
will be left open to be filled up by the modification of the old
inhabitants. Lastly, isolation will give time for a new variety to be
improved at a slow rate; and this may sometimes be of much importance.
If, however, an isolated area be very small, either from being
surrounded by barriers, or from having very peculiar physical
conditions, the total number of the inhabitants will be small; and this
will retard the production of new species through natural selection, by
decreasing the chances of favourable variations arising.

The mere lapse of time by itself does nothing, either for or against
natural selection. I state this because it has been erroneously asserted
that the element of time has been assumed by me to play an all-important
part in modifying species, as if all the forms of life were necessarily
undergoing change through some innate law. Lapse of time is only so far
important, and its importance in this respect is great, that it gives
a better chance of beneficial variations arising and of their being
selected, accumulated, and fixed. It likewise tends to increase the
direct action of the physical conditions of life, in relation to the
constitution of each organism.

If we turn to nature to test the truth of these remarks, and look at any
small isolated area, such as an oceanic island, although the number of
the species inhabiting it is small, as we shall see in our chapter on
Geographical Distribution; yet of these species a very large proportion
are endemic,--that is, have been produced there and nowhere else in the
world. Hence an oceanic island at first sight seems to have been highly
favourable for the production of new species. But we may thus deceive
ourselves, for to ascertain whether a small isolated area, or a large
open area like a continent, has been most favourable for the production
of new organic forms, we ought to make the comparison within equal
times; and this we are incapable of doing.

Although isolation is of great importance in the production of new
species, on the whole I am inclined to believe that largeness of area
is still more important, especially for the production of species which
shall prove capable of enduring for a long period, and of spreading
widely. Throughout a great and open area, not only will there be a
better chance of favourable variations, arising from the large number of
individuals of the same species there supported, but the conditions of
life are much more complex from the large number of already existing
species; and if some of these many species become modified and improved,
others will have to be improved in a corresponding degree, or they
will be exterminated. Each new form, also, as soon as it has been much
improved, will be able to spread over the open and continuous area, and
will thus come into competition with many other forms. Moreover, great
areas, though now continuous, will often, owing to former oscillations
of level, have existed in a broken condition, so that the good effects
of isolation will generally, to a certain extent, have concurred.
Finally, I conclude that, although small isolated areas have been in
some respects highly favourable for the production of new species, yet
that the course of modification will generally have been more rapid on
large areas; and what is more important, that the new forms produced on
large areas, which already have been victorious over many competitors,
will be those that will spread most widely, and will give rise to the
greatest number of new varieties and species. They will thus play a more
important part in the changing history of the organic world.

In accordance with this view, we can, perhaps, understand some
facts which will be again alluded to in our chapter on Geographical
Distribution; for instance, the fact of the productions of the
smaller continent of Australia now yielding before those of the larger
Europaeo-Asiatic area. Thus, also, it is that continental productions
have everywhere become so largely naturalised on islands. On a small
island, the race for life will have been less severe, and there will
have been less modification and less extermination. Hence, we can
understand how it is that the flora of Madeira, according to Oswald
Heer, resembles to a certain extent the extinct tertiary flora of
Europe. All fresh water basins, taken together, make a small area
compared with that of the sea or of the land. Consequently, the
competition between fresh water productions will have been less severe
than elsewhere; new forms will have been more slowly produced, and old
forms more slowly exterminated. And it is in fresh water basins that
we find seven genera of Ganoid fishes, remnants of a once preponderant
order: and in fresh water we find some of the most anomalous forms now
known in the world, as the Ornithorhynchus and Lepidosiren, which, like
fossils, connect to a certain extent orders at present widely separated
in the natural scale. These anomalous forms may be called living
fossils; they have endured to the present day, from having inhabited
a confined area, and from having been exposed to less varied, and
therefore less severe, competition.

To sum up, as far as the extreme intricacy of the subject permits, the
circumstances favourable and unfavourable for the production of new
species through natural selection. I conclude that for terrestrial
productions a large continental area, which has undergone many
oscillations of level, will have been the most favourable for the
production of many new forms of life, fitted to endure for a long
time and to spread widely. While the area existed as a continent the
inhabitants will have been numerous in individuals and kinds, and will
have been subjected to severe competition. When converted by subsidence
into large separate islands there will still have existed many
individuals of the same species on each island: intercrossing on the
confines of the range of each new species will have been checked: after
physical changes of any kind immigration will have been prevented, so
that new places in the polity of each island will have had to be filled
up by the modification of the old inhabitants; and time will have been
allowed for the varieties in each to become well modified and perfected.
When, by renewed elevation, the islands were reconverted into a
continental area, there will again have been very severe competition;
the most favoured or improved varieties will have been enabled to
spread; there will have been much extinction of the less improved forms,
and the relative proportional numbers of the various inhabitants of the
reunited continent will again have been changed; and again there will
have been a fair field for natural selection to improve still further
the inhabitants, and thus to produce new species.

That natural selection generally act with extreme slowness I fully
admit. It can act only when there are places in the natural polity of a
district which can be better occupied by the modification of some of its
existing inhabitants. The occurrence of such places will often depend
on physical changes, which generally take place very slowly, and on the
immigration of better adapted forms being prevented. As some few of
the old inhabitants become modified the mutual relations of others will
often be disturbed; and this will create new places, ready to be filled
up by better adapted forms; but all this will take place very slowly.
Although all the individuals of the same species differ in some slight
degree from each other, it would often be long before differences of
the right nature in various parts of the organisation might occur. The
result would often be greatly retarded by free intercrossing. Many will
exclaim that these several causes are amply sufficient to neutralise the
power of natural selection. I do not believe so. But I do believe that
natural selection will generally act very slowly, only at long intervals
of time, and only on a few of the inhabitants of the same region. I
further believe that these slow, intermittent results accord well with
what geology tells us of the rate and manner at which the inhabitants of
the world have changed.

Slow though the process of selection may be, if feeble man can do much
by artificial selection, I can see no limit to the amount of change,
to the beauty and complexity of the coadaptations between all organic
beings, one with another and with their physical conditions of life,
which may have been effected in the long course of time through nature's
power of selection, that is by the survival of the fittest.

EXTINCTION CAUSED BY NATURAL SELECTION.

This subject will be more fully discussed in our chapter on Geology; but
it must here be alluded to from being intimately connected with natural
selection. Natural selection acts solely through the preservation of
variations in some way advantageous, which consequently endure. Owing to
the high geometrical rate of increase of all organic beings, each area
is already fully stocked with inhabitants, and it follows from this,
that as the favoured forms increase in number, so, generally, will the
less favoured decrease and become rare. Rarity, as geology tells us,
is the precursor to extinction. We can see that any form which
is represented by few individuals will run a good chance of utter
extinction, during great fluctuations in the nature or the seasons, or
from a temporary increase in the number of its enemies. But we may go
further than this; for as new forms are produced, unless we admit that
specific forms can go on indefinitely increasing in number, many old
forms must become extinct. That the number of specific forms has not
indefinitely increased, geology plainly tells us; and we shall presently
attempt to show why it is that the number of species throughout the
world has not become immeasurably great.

We have seen that the species which are most numerous in individuals
have the best chance of producing favourable variations within any given
period. We have evidence of this, in the facts stated in the second
chapter, showing that it is the common and diffused or dominant species
which offer the greatest number of recorded varieties. Hence, rare
species will be less quickly modified or improved within any given
period; they will consequently be beaten in the race for life by the
modified and improved descendants of the commoner species.

From these several considerations I think it inevitably follows,
that as new species in the course of time are formed through natural
selection, others will become rarer and rarer, and finally extinct.
The forms which stand in closest competition with those undergoing
modification and improvement, will naturally suffer most. And we have
seen in the chapter on the Struggle for Existence that it is the most
closely-allied forms,--varieties of the same species, and species of
the same genus or related genera,--which, from having nearly the same
structure, constitution and habits, generally come into the severest
competition with each other. Consequently, each new variety or species,
during the progress of its formation, will generally press hardest
on its nearest kindred, and tend to exterminate them. We see the same
process of extermination among our domesticated productions, through
the selection of improved forms by man. Many curious instances could be
given showing how quickly new breeds of cattle, sheep and other animals,
and varieties of flowers, take the place of older and inferior kinds. In
Yorkshire, it is historically known that the ancient black cattle were
displaced by the long-horns, and that these "were swept away by the
short-horns" (I quote the words of an agricultural writer) "as if by
some murderous pestilence."

DIVERGENCE OF CHARACTER.

The principle, which I have designated by this term, is of high
importance, and explains, as I believe, several important facts. In
the first place, varieties, even strongly-marked ones, though having
somewhat of the character of species--as is shown by the hopeless doubts
in many cases how to rank them--yet certainly differ far less from each
other than do good and distinct species. Nevertheless according to my
view, varieties are species in the process of formation, or are, as
I have called them, incipient species. How, then, does the lesser
difference between varieties become augmented into the greater
difference between species? That this does habitually happen, we must
infer from most of the innumerable species throughout nature presenting
well-marked differences; whereas varieties, the supposed prototypes and
parents of future well-marked species, present slight and ill-defined
differences. Mere chance, as we may call it, might cause one variety
to differ in some character from its parents, and the offspring of this
variety again to differ from its parent in the very same character and
in a greater degree; but this alone would never account for so habitual
and large a degree of difference as that between the species of the same
genus.

As has always been my practice, I have sought light on this head from
our domestic productions. We shall here find something analogous. It
will be admitted that the production of races so different as short-horn
and Hereford cattle, race and cart horses, the several breeds of
pigeons, etc., could never have been effected by the mere chance
accumulation of similar variations during many successive generations.
In practice, a fancier is, for instance, struck by a pigeon having a
slightly shorter beak; another fancier is struck by a pigeon having a
rather longer beak; and on the acknowledged principle that "fanciers do
not and will not admire a medium standard, but like extremes," they
both go on (as has actually occurred with the sub-breeds of the
tumbler-pigeon) choosing and breeding from birds with longer and longer
beaks, or with shorter and shorter beaks. Again, we may suppose that at
an early period of history, the men of one nation or district required
swifter horses, while those of another required stronger and bulkier
horses. The early differences would be very slight; but, in the course
of time, from the continued selection of swifter horses in the one case,
and of stronger ones in the other, the differences would become greater,
and would be noted as forming two sub-breeds. Ultimately after the
lapse of centuries, these sub-breeds would become converted into two
well-established and distinct breeds. As the differences became greater,
the inferior animals with intermediate characters, being neither very
swift nor very strong, would not have been used for breeding, and will
thus have tended to disappear. Here, then, we see in man's productions
the action of what may be called the principle of divergence, causing
differences, at first barely appreciable, steadily to increase, and
the breeds to diverge in character, both from each other and from their
common parent.

But how, it may be asked, can any analogous principle apply in nature?
I believe it can and does apply most efficiently (though it was a long
time before I saw how), from the simple circumstance that the more
diversified the descendants from any one species become in structure,
constitution, and habits, by so much will they be better enabled to
seize on many and widely diversified places in the polity of nature, and
so be enabled to increase in numbers.

We can clearly discern this in the case of animals with simple habits.
Take the case of a carnivorous quadruped, of which the number that can
be supported in any country has long ago arrived at its full average.
If its natural power of increase be allowed to act, it can succeed in
increasing (the country not undergoing any change in conditions) only by
its varying descendants seizing on places at present occupied by other
animals: some of them, for instance, being enabled to feed on new kinds
of prey, either dead or alive; some inhabiting new stations, climbing
trees, frequenting water, and some perhaps becoming less carnivorous.
The more diversified in habits and structure the descendants of our
carnivorous animals become, the more places they will be enabled to
occupy. What applies to one animal will apply throughout all time to
all animals--that is, if they vary--for otherwise natural selection can
effect nothing. So it will be with plants. It has been experimentally
proved, that if a plot of ground be sown with one species of grass,
and a similar plot be sown with several distinct genera of grasses,
a greater number of plants and a greater weight of dry herbage can be
raised in the latter than in the former case. The same has been found
to hold good when one variety and several mixed varieties of wheat have
been sown on equal spaces of ground. Hence, if any one species of grass
were to go on varying, and the varieties were continually selected which
differed from each other in the same manner, though in a very slight
degree, as do the distinct species and genera of grasses, a greater
number of individual plants of this species, including its modified
descendants, would succeed in living on the same piece of ground. And
we know that each species and each variety of grass is annually sowing
almost countless seeds; and is thus striving, as it may be said, to
the utmost to increase in number. Consequently, in the course of many
thousand generations, the most distinct varieties of any one species
of grass would have the best chance of succeeding and of increasing
in numbers, and thus of supplanting the less distinct varieties; and
varieties, when rendered very distinct from each other, take the rank of
species.

The truth of the principle that the greatest amount of life can be
supported by great diversification of structure, is seen under many
natural circumstances. In an extremely small area, especially if freely
open to immigration, and where the contest between individual and
individual must be very severe, we always find great diversity in its
inhabitants. For instance, I found that a piece of turf, three feet by
four in size, which had been exposed for many years to exactly the same
conditions, supported twenty species of plants, and these belonged to
eighteen genera and to eight orders, which shows how much these plants
differed from each other. So it is with the plants and insects on small
and uniform islets: also in small ponds of fresh water. Farmers find
that they can raise more food by a rotation of plants belonging to the
most different orders: nature follows what may be called a simultaneous
rotation. Most of the animals and plants which live close round any
small piece of ground, could live on it (supposing its nature not to be
in any way peculiar), and may be said to be striving to the utmost
to live there; but, it is seen, that where they come into the closest
competition, the advantages of diversification of structure, with the
accompanying differences of habit and constitution, determine that the
inhabitants, which thus jostle each other most closely, shall, as a
general rule, belong to what we call different genera and orders.

The same principle is seen in the naturalisation of plants through man's
agency in foreign lands. It might have been expected that the plants
which would succeed in becoming naturalised in any land would generally
have been closely allied to the indigenes; for these are commonly looked
at as specially created and adapted for their own country. It might
also, perhaps, have been expected that naturalised plants would have
belonged to a few groups more especially adapted to certain stations in
their new homes. But the case is very different; and Alph. de Candolle
has well remarked, in his great and admirable work, that floras gain by
naturalisation, proportionally with the number of the native genera and
species, far more in new genera than in new species. To give a single
instance: in the last edition of Dr. Asa Gray's "Manual of the Flora of
the Northern United States," 260 naturalised plants are enumerated, and
these belong to 162 genera. We thus see that these naturalised plants
are of a highly diversified nature. They differ, moreover, to a large
extent, from the indigenes, for out of the 162 naturalised genera,
no less than 100 genera are not there indigenous, and thus a large
proportional addition is made to the genera now living in the United
States.

By considering the nature of the plants or animals which have in any
country struggled successfully with the indigenes, and have there become
naturalised, we may gain some crude idea in what manner some of the
natives would have had to be modified in order to gain an advantage over
their compatriots; and we may at least infer that diversification of
structure, amounting to new generic differences, would be profitable to
them.

The advantage of diversification of structure in the inhabitants of the
same region is, in fact, the same as that of the physiological division
of labour in the organs of the same individual body--a subject so well
elucidated by Milne Edwards. No physiologist doubts that a stomach by
being adapted to digest vegetable matter alone, or flesh alone, draws
most nutriment from these substances. So in the general economy of
any land, the more widely and perfectly the animals and plants are
diversified for different habits of life, so will a greater number of
individuals be capable of there supporting themselves. A set of animals,
with their organisation but little diversified, could hardly compete
with a set more perfectly diversified in structure. It may be doubted,
for instance, whether the Australian marsupials, which are divided into
groups differing but little from each other, and feebly representing, as
Mr. Waterhouse and others have remarked, our carnivorous, ruminant, and
rodent mammals, could successfully compete with these well-developed
orders. In the Australian mammals, we see the process of diversification
in an early and incomplete stage of development.

THE PROBABLE EFFECTS OF THE ACTION OF NATURAL SELECTION THROUGH
DIVERGENCE OF CHARACTER AND EXTINCTION, ON THE DESCENDANTS OF A COMMON
ANCESTOR.

After the foregoing discussion, which has been much compressed, we may
assume that the modified descendants of any one species will succeed so
much the better as they become more diversified in structure, and are
thus enabled to encroach on places occupied by other beings. Now let
us see how this principle of benefit being derived from divergence of
character, combined with the principles of natural selection and of
extinction, tends to act.

The accompanying diagram will aid us in understanding this rather
perplexing subject. Let A to L represent the species of a genus large
in its own country; these species are supposed to resemble each other
in unequal degrees, as is so generally the case in nature, and as is
represented in the diagram by the letters standing at unequal distances.
I have said a large genus, because as we saw in the second chapter, on
an average more species vary in large genera than in small genera; and
the varying species of the large genera present a greater number of
varieties. We have, also, seen that the species, which are the commonest
and most widely-diffused, vary more than do the rare and restricted
species. Let (A) be a common, widely-diffused, and varying species,
belonging to a genus large in its own country. The branching and
diverging dotted lines of unequal lengths proceeding from (A), may
represent its varying offspring. The variations are supposed to be
extremely slight, but of the most diversified nature; they are not
supposed all to appear simultaneously, but often after long intervals of
time; nor are they all supposed to endure for equal periods. Only
those variations which are in some way profitable will be preserved or
naturally selected. And here the importance of the principle of benefit
derived from divergence of character comes in; for this will generally
lead to the most different or divergent variations (represented by
the outer dotted lines) being preserved and accumulated by natural
selection. When a dotted line reaches one of the horizontal lines,
and is there marked by a small numbered letter, a sufficient amount of
variation is supposed to have been accumulated to form it into a fairly
well-marked variety, such as would be thought worthy of record in a
systematic work.

The intervals between the horizontal lines in the diagram, may represent
each a thousand or more generations. After a thousand generations,
species (A) is supposed to have produced two fairly well-marked
varieties, namely a1 and m1. These two varieties will generally still
be exposed to the same conditions which made their parents variable, and
the tendency to variability is in itself hereditary; consequently they
will likewise tend to vary, and commonly in nearly the same manner as
did their parents. Moreover, these two varieties, being only slightly
modified forms, will tend to inherit those advantages which made their
parent (A) more numerous than most of the other inhabitants of the same
country; they will also partake of those more general advantages which
made the genus to which the parent-species belonged, a large genus
in its own country. And all these circumstances are favourable to the
production of new varieties.

If, then, these two varieties be variable, the most divergent of
their variations will generally be preserved during the next thousand
generations. And after this interval, variety a1 is supposed in the
diagram to have produced variety a2, which will, owing to the principle
of divergence, differ more from (A) than did variety a1. Variety m1 is
supposed to have produced two varieties, namely m2 and s2, differing
from each other, and more considerably from their common parent (A). We
may continue the process by similar steps for any length of time; some
of the varieties, after each thousand generations, producing only
a single variety, but in a more and more modified condition, some
producing two or three varieties, and some failing to produce any. Thus
the varieties or modified descendants of the common parent (A), will
generally go on increasing in number and diverging in character. In the
diagram the process is represented up to the ten-thousandth generation,
and under a condensed and simplified form up to the fourteen-thousandth
generation.

But I must here remark that I do not suppose that the process ever goes
on so regularly as is represented in the diagram, though in itself made
somewhat irregular, nor that it goes on continuously; it is far more
probable that each form remains for long periods unaltered, and then
again undergoes modification. Nor do I suppose that the most divergent
varieties are invariably preserved: a medium form may often long endure,
and may or may not produce more than one modified descendant; for
natural selection will always act according to the nature of the places
which are either unoccupied or not perfectly occupied by other beings;
and this will depend on infinitely complex relations. But as a general
rule, the more diversified in structure the descendants from any one
species can be rendered, the more places they will be enabled to seize
on, and the more their modified progeny will increase. In our diagram
the line of succession is broken at regular intervals by small numbered
letters marking the successive forms which have become sufficiently
distinct to be recorded as varieties. But these breaks are imaginary,
and might have been inserted anywhere, after intervals long enough to
allow the accumulation of a considerable amount of divergent variation.

As all the modified descendants from a common and widely-diffused
species, belonging to a large genus, will tend to partake of the
same advantages which made their parent successful in life, they will
generally go on multiplying in number as well as diverging in character:
this is represented in the diagram by the several divergent branches
proceeding from (A). The modified offspring from the later and more
highly improved branches in the lines of descent, will, it is probable,
often take the place of, and so destroy, the earlier and less improved
branches: this is represented in the diagram by some of the lower
branches not reaching to the upper horizontal lines. In some cases no
doubt the process of modification will be confined to a single line of
descent, and the number of modified descendants will not be increased;
although the amount of divergent modification may have been augmented.
This case would be represented in the diagram, if all the lines
proceeding from (A) were removed, excepting that from a1 to a10. In the
same way the English racehorse and English pointer have apparently
both gone on slowly diverging in character from their original stocks,
without either having given off any fresh branches or races.

After ten thousand generations, species (A) is supposed to have produced
three forms, a10, f10, and m10, which, from having diverged in character
during the successive generations, will have come to differ largely, but
perhaps unequally, from each other and from their common parent. If we
suppose the amount of change between each horizontal line in our diagram
to be excessively small, these three forms may still be only well-marked
varieties; but we have only to suppose the steps in the process of
modification to be more numerous or greater in amount, to convert these
three forms into doubtful or at least into well-defined species:
thus the diagram illustrates the steps by which the small differences
distinguishing varieties are increased into the larger differences
distinguishing species. By continuing the same process for a greater
number of generations (as shown in the diagram in a condensed and
simplified manner), we get eight species, marked by the letters between
a14 and m14, all descended from (A). Thus, as I believe, species are
multiplied and genera are formed.

In a large genus it is probable that more than one species would vary.
In the diagram I have assumed that a second species (I) has produced, by
analogous steps, after ten thousand generations, either two well-marked
varieties (w10 and z10) or two species, according to the amount of
change supposed to be represented between the horizontal lines. After
fourteen thousand generations, six new species, marked by the letters
n14 to z14, are supposed to have been produced. In any genus, the
species which are already very different in character from each
other, will generally tend to produce the greatest number of modified
descendants; for these will have the best chance of seizing on new and
widely different places in the polity of nature: hence in the diagram I
have chosen the extreme species (A), and the nearly extreme species (I),
as those which have largely varied, and have given rise to new varieties
and species. The other nine species (marked by capital letters) of our
original genus, may for long but unequal periods continue to transmit
unaltered descendants; and this is shown in the diagram by the dotted
lines unequally prolonged upwards.

But during the process of modification, represented in the diagram,
another of our principles, namely that of extinction, will have played
an important part. As in each fully stocked country natural selection
necessarily acts by the selected form having some advantage in the
struggle for life over other forms, there will be a constant tendency in
the improved descendants of any one species to supplant and exterminate
in each stage of descent their predecessors and their original
progenitor. For it should be remembered that the competition will
generally be most severe between those forms which are most nearly
related to each other in habits, constitution and structure. Hence all
the intermediate forms between the earlier and later states, that is
between the less and more improved states of a the same species, as well
as the original parent-species itself, will generally tend to become
extinct. So it probably will be with many whole collateral lines of
descent, which will be conquered by later and improved lines. If,
however, the modified offspring of a species get into some distinct
country, or become quickly adapted to some quite new station, in which
offspring and progenitor do not come into competition, both may continue
to exist.

If, then, our diagram be assumed to represent a considerable amount of
modification, species (A) and all the earlier varieties will have become
extinct, being replaced by eight new species (a14 to m14); and species
(I) will be replaced by six (n14 to z14) new species.

But we may go further than this. The original species of our genus were
supposed to resemble each other in unequal degrees, as is so generally
the case in nature; species (A) being more nearly related to B, C, and
D than to the other species; and species (I) more to G, H, K, L, than to
the others. These two species (A and I), were also supposed to be very
common and widely diffused species, so that they must originally have
had some advantage over most of the other species of the genus. Their
modified descendants, fourteen in number at the fourteen-thousandth
generation, will probably have inherited some of the same advantages:
they have also been modified and improved in a diversified manner at
each stage of descent, so as to have become adapted to many related
places in the natural economy of their country. It seems, therefore,
extremely probable that they will have taken the places of, and thus
exterminated, not only their parents (A) and (I), but likewise some of
the original species which were most nearly related to their parents.
Hence very few of the original species will have transmitted offspring
to the fourteen-thousandth generation. We may suppose that only one (F)
of the two species (E and F) which were least closely related to the
other nine original species, has transmitted descendants to this late
stage of descent.

The new species in our diagram, descended from the original eleven
species, will now be fifteen in number. Owing to the divergent tendency
of natural selection, the extreme amount of difference in character
between species a14 and z14 will be much greater than that between the
most distinct of the original eleven species. The new species, moreover,
will be allied to each other in a widely different manner. Of the eight
descendants from (A) the three marked a14, q14, p14, will be nearly
related from having recently branched off from a10; b14 and f14, from
having diverged at an earlier period from a5, will be in some degree
distinct from the three first-named species; and lastly, o14, e14, and
m14, will be nearly related one to the other, but, from having diverged
at the first commencement of the process of modification, will be widely
different from the other five species, and may constitute a sub-genus or
a distinct genus.

The six descendants from (I) will form two sub-genera or genera. But as
the original species (I) differed largely from (A), standing nearly
at the extreme end of the original genus, the six descendants from (I)
will, owing to inheritance alone, differ considerably from the eight
descendants from (A); the two groups, moreover, are supposed to have
gone on diverging in different directions. The intermediate species,
also (and this is a very important consideration), which connected the
original species (A) and (I), have all become, except (F), extinct, and
have left no descendants. Hence the six new species descended from
(I), and the eight descendants from (A), will have to be ranked as very
distinct genera, or even as distinct sub-families.

Thus it is, as I believe, that two or more genera are produced by
descent with modification, from two or more species of the same genus.
And the two or more parent-species are supposed to be descended from
some one species of an earlier genus. In our diagram this is indicated
by the broken lines beneath the capital letters, converging in
sub-branches downwards towards a single point; this point represents
a species, the supposed progenitor of our several new sub-genera and
genera.

It is worth while to reflect for a moment on the character of the new
species F14, which is supposed not to have diverged much in character,
but to have retained the form of (F), either unaltered or altered only
in a slight degree. In this case its affinities to the other fourteen
new species will be of a curious and circuitous nature. Being descended
from a form that stood between the parent-species (A) and (I),
now supposed to be extinct and unknown, it will be in some degree
intermediate in character between the two groups descended from these
two species. But as these two groups have gone on diverging in character
from the type of their parents, the new species (F14) will not be
directly intermediate between them, but rather between types of the two
groups; and every naturalist will be able to call such cases before his
mind.

In the diagram each horizontal line has hitherto been supposed to
represent a thousand generations, but each may represent a million or
more generations; it may also represent a section of the successive
strata of the earth's crust including extinct remains. We shall, when we
come to our chapter on geology, have to refer again to this subject,
and I think we shall then see that the diagram throws light on the
affinities of extinct beings, which, though generally belonging to the
same orders, families, or genera, with those now living, yet are often,
in some degree, intermediate in character between existing groups; and
we can understand this fact, for the extinct species lived at various
remote epochs when the branching lines of descent had diverged less.

I see no reason to limit the process of modification, as now explained,
to the formation of genera alone. If, in the diagram, we suppose the
amount of change represented by each successive group of diverging
dotted lines to be great, the forms marked a14 to p14, those marked
b14 and f14, and those marked o14 to m14, will form three very distinct
genera. We shall also have two very distinct genera descended from (I),
differing widely from the descendants of (A). These two groups of genera
will thus form two distinct families, or orders, according to the amount
of divergent modification supposed to be represented in the diagram. And
the two new families, or orders, are descended from two species of the
original genus; and these are supposed to be descended from some still
more ancient and unknown form.

We have seen that in each country it is the species belonging to the
larger genera which oftenest present varieties or incipient species.
This, indeed, might have been expected; for as natural selection acts
through one form having some advantage over other forms in the struggle
for existence, it will chiefly act on those which already have some
advantage; and the largeness of any group shows that its species have
inherited from a common ancestor some advantage in common. Hence, the
struggle for the production of new and modified descendants will mainly
lie between the larger groups, which are all trying to increase in
number. One large group will slowly conquer another large group,
reduce its number, and thus lessen its chance of further variation and
improvement. Within the same large group, the later and more highly
perfected sub-groups, from branching out and seizing on many new places
in the polity of nature, will constantly tend to supplant and destroy
the earlier and less improved sub-groups. Small and broken groups and
sub-groups will finally disappear. Looking to the future, we can predict
that the groups of organic beings which are now large and triumphant,
and which are least broken up, that is, which have as yet suffered least
extinction, will, for a long period, continue to increase. But which
groups will ultimately prevail, no man can predict; for we know that
many groups, formerly most extensively developed, have now become
extinct. Looking still more remotely to the future, we may predict
that, owing to the continued and steady increase of the larger groups,
a multitude of smaller groups will become utterly extinct, and leave no
modified descendants; and consequently that, of the species living at
any one period, extremely few will transmit descendants to a remote
futurity. I shall have to return to this subject in the chapter on
classification, but I may add that as, according to this view, extremely
few of the more ancient species have transmitted descendants to the
present day, and, as all the descendants of the same species form a
class, we can understand how it is that there exist so few classes in
each main division of the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Although few of
the most ancient species have left modified descendants, yet, at remote
geological periods, the earth may have been almost as well peopled with
species of many genera, families, orders and classes, as at the present
day.

ON THE DEGREE TO WHICH ORGANISATION TENDS TO ADVANCE.

Natural selection acts exclusively by the preservation and accumulation
of variations, which are beneficial under the organic and inorganic
conditions to which each creature is exposed at all periods of life.
The ultimate result is that each creature tends to become more and more
improved in relation to its conditions. This improvement inevitably
leads to the gradual advancement of the organisation of the greater
number of living beings throughout the world. But here we enter on a
very intricate subject, for naturalists have not defined to each other's
satisfaction what is meant by an advance in organisation. Among the
vertebrata the degree of intellect and an approach in structure to man
clearly come into play. It might be thought that the amount of change
which the various parts and organs pass through in their development
from embryo to maturity would suffice as a standard of comparison; but
there are cases, as with certain parasitic crustaceans, in which several
parts of the structure become less perfect, so that the mature animal
cannot be called higher than its larva. Von Baer's standard seems
the most widely applicable and the best, namely, the amount of
differentiation of the parts of the same organic being, in the adult
state, as I should be inclined to add, and their specialisation
for different functions; or, as Milne Edwards would express it, the
completeness of the division of physiological labour. But we shall see
how obscure this subject is if we look, for instance, to fishes, among
which some naturalists rank those as highest which, like the sharks,
approach nearest to amphibians; while other naturalists rank the common
bony or teleostean fishes as the highest, inasmuch as they are most
strictly fish-like, and differ most from the other vertebrate classes.
We see still more plainly the obscurity of the subject by turning
to plants, among which the standard of intellect is of course quite
excluded; and here some botanists rank those plants as highest which
have every organ, as sepals, petals, stamens and pistils, fully
developed in each flower; whereas other botanists, probably with more
truth, look at the plants which have their several organs much modified
and reduced in number as the highest.

If we take as the standard of high organisation, the amount of
differentiation and specialisation of the several organs in each being
when adult (and this will include the advancement of the brain for
intellectual purposes), natural selection clearly leads towards this
standard: for all physiologists admit that the specialisation of organs,
inasmuch as in this state they perform their functions better, is
an advantage to each being; and hence the accumulation of variations
tending towards specialisation is within the scope of natural selection.
On the other hand, we can see, bearing in mind that all organic
beings are striving to increase at a high ratio and to seize on every
unoccupied or less well occupied place in the economy of nature, that
it is quite possible for natural selection gradually to fit a being to
a situation in which several organs would be superfluous or useless: in
such cases there would be retrogression in the scale of organisation.
Whether organisation on the whole has actually advanced from the
remotest geological periods to the present day will be more conveniently
discussed in our chapter on Geological Succession.

But it may be objected that if all organic beings thus tend to rise in
the scale, how is it that throughout the world a multitude of the lowest
forms still exist; and how is it that in each great class some forms
are far more highly developed than others? Why have not the more highly
developed forms every where supplanted and exterminated the lower?
Lamarck, who believed in an innate and inevitable tendency towards
perfection in all organic beings, seems to have felt this difficulty
so strongly that he was led to suppose that new and simple forms are
continually being produced by spontaneous generation. Science has not as
yet proved the truth of this belief, whatever the future may reveal.
On our theory the continued existence of lowly organisms offers no
difficulty; for natural selection, or the survival of the fittest, does
not necessarily include progressive development--it only takes advantage
of such variations as arise and are beneficial to each creature under
its complex relations of life. And it may be asked what advantage,
as far as we can see, would it be to an infusorian animalcule--to an
intestinal worm--or even to an earth-worm, to be highly organised. If
it were no advantage, these forms would be left, by natural selection,
unimproved or but little improved, and might remain for indefinite ages
in their present lowly condition. And geology tells us that some of
the lowest forms, as the infusoria and rhizopods, have remained for an
enormous period in nearly their present state. But to suppose that most
of the many now existing low forms have not in the least advanced since
the first dawn of life would be extremely rash; for every naturalist who
has dissected some of the beings now ranked as very low in the
scale, must have been struck with their really wondrous and beautiful
organisation.

Nearly the same remarks are applicable, if we look to the different
grades of organisation within the same great group; for instance, in the
vertebrata, to the co-existence of mammals and fish--among mammalia, to
the co-existence of man and the ornithorhynchus--among fishes, to the
co-existence of the shark and the lancelet (Amphioxus), which latter
fish in the extreme simplicity of its structure approaches the
invertebrate classes. But mammals and fish hardly come into competition
with each other; the advancement of the whole class of mammals, or of
certain members in this class, to the highest grade would not lead to
their taking the place of fishes. Physiologists believe that the brain
must be bathed by warm blood to be highly active, and this requires
aerial respiration; so that warm-blooded mammals when inhabiting the
water lie under a disadvantage in having to come continually to the
surface to breathe. With fishes, members of the shark family would not
tend to supplant the lancelet; for the lancelet, as I hear from Fritz
Muller, has as sole companion and competitor on the barren sandy shore
of South Brazil, an anomalous annelid. The three lowest orders of
mammals, namely, marsupials, edentata, and rodents, co-exist in South
America in the same region with numerous monkeys, and probably interfere
little with each other. Although organisation, on the whole, may have
advanced and be still advancing throughout the world, yet the scale will
always present many degrees of perfection; for the high advancement of
certain whole classes, or of certain members of each class, does not at
all necessarily lead to the extinction of those groups with which
they do not enter into close competition. In some cases, as we shall
hereafter see, lowly organised forms appear to have been preserved to
the present day, from inhabiting confined or peculiar stations, where
they have been subjected to less severe competition, and where their
scanty numbers have retarded the chance of favourable variations
arising.

Finally, I believe that many lowly organised forms now exist throughout
the world, from various causes. In some cases variations or individual
differences of a favourable nature may never have arisen for natural
selection to act on and accumulate. In no case, probably, has time
sufficed for the utmost possible amount of development. In some few
cases there has been what we must call retrogression or organisation.
But the main cause lies in the fact that under very simple conditions
of life a high organisation would be of no service--possibly would be of
actual disservice, as being of a more delicate nature, and more liable
to be put out of order and injured.

Looking to the first dawn of life, when all organic beings, as we may
believe, presented the simplest structure, how, it has been asked,
could the first step in the advancement or differentiation of parts
have arisen? Mr. Herbert Spencer would probably answer that, as soon as
simple unicellular organisms came by growth or division to be compounded
of several cells, or became attached to any supporting surface, his law
"that homologous units of any order become differentiated in proportion
as their relations to incident forces become different" would come into
action. But as we have no facts to guide us, speculation on the subject
is almost useless. It is, however, an error to suppose that there would
be no struggle for existence, and, consequently, no natural selection,
until many forms had been produced: variations in a single species
inhabiting an isolated station might be beneficial, and thus the whole
mass of individuals might be modified, or two distinct forms might
arise. But, as I remarked towards the close of the introduction, no
one ought to feel surprise at much remaining as yet unexplained on the
origin of species, if we make due allowance for our profound ignorance
on the mutual relations of the inhabitants of the world at the present
time, and still more so during past ages.

CONVERGENCE OF CHARACTER.

Mr. H.C. Watson thinks that I have overrated the importance of
divergence of character (in which, however, he apparently believes), and
that convergence, as it may be called, has likewise played a part. If
two species belonging to two distinct though allied genera, had both
produced a large number of new and divergent forms, it is conceivable
that these might approach each other so closely that they would have
all to be classed under the same genus; and thus the descendants of two
distinct genera would converge into one. But it would in most cases
be extremely rash to attribute to convergence a close and general
similarity of structure in the modified descendants of widely distinct
forms. The shape of a crystal is determined solely by the molecular
forces, and it is not surprising that dissimilar substances should
sometimes assume the same form; but with organic beings we should
bear in mind that the form of each depends on an infinitude of complex
relations, namely on the variations which have arisen, these being due
to causes far too intricate to be followed out--on the nature of the
variations which have been preserved or selected, and this depends on
the surrounding physical conditions, and in a still higher degree on
the surrounding organisms with which each being has come into
competition--and lastly, on inheritance (in itself a fluctuating
element) from innumerable progenitors, all of which have had their forms
determined through equally complex relations. It is incredible that the
descendants of two organisms, which had originally differed in a marked
manner, should ever afterwards converge so closely as to lead to a near
approach to identity throughout their whole organisation. If this had
occurred, we should meet with the same form, independently of genetic
connection, recurring in widely separated geological formations; and the
balance of evidence is opposed to any such an admission.

Mr. Watson has also objected that the continued action of natural
selection, together with divergence of character, would tend to make an
indefinite number of specific forms. As far as mere inorganic conditions
are concerned, it seems probable that a sufficient number of species
would soon become adapted to all considerable diversities of heat,
moisture, etc.; but I fully admit that the mutual relations of organic
beings are more important; and as the number of species in any country
goes on increasing, the organic conditions of life must become more and
more complex. Consequently there seems at first no limit to the amount
of profitable diversification of structure, and therefore no limit to
the number of species which might be produced. We do not know that even
the most prolific area is fully stocked with specific forms: at the Cape
of Good Hope and in Australia, which support such an astonishing number
of species, many European plants have become naturalised. But geology
shows us, that from an early part of the tertiary period the number of
species of shells, and that from the middle part of this same period,
the number of mammals has not greatly or at all increased. What then
checks an indefinite increase in the number of species? The amount of
life (I do not mean the number of specific forms) supported on an
area must have a limit, depending so largely as it does on physical
conditions; therefore, if an area be inhabited by very many species,
each or nearly each species will be represented by few individuals;
and such species will be liable to extermination from accidental
fluctuations in the nature of the seasons or in the number of their
enemies. The process of extermination in such cases would be rapid,
whereas the production of new species must always be slow. Imagine the
extreme case of as many species as individuals in England, and the
first severe winter or very dry summer would exterminate thousands on
thousands of species. Rare species, and each species will become rare
if the number of species in any country becomes indefinitely increased,
will, on the principal often explained, present within a given period
few favourable variations; consequently, the process of giving birth to
new specific forms would thus be retarded. When any species becomes
very rare, close interbreeding will help to exterminate it; authors have
thought that this comes into play in accounting for the deterioration
of the aurochs in Lithuania, of red deer in Scotland and of bears
in Norway, etc. Lastly, and this I am inclined to think is the most
important element, a dominant species, which has already beaten many
competitors in its own home, will tend to spread and supplant many
others. Alph. de Candolle has shown that those species which spread
widely tend generally to spread VERY widely, consequently they will tend
to supplant and exterminate several species in several areas, and thus
check the inordinate increase of specific forms throughout the world.
Dr. Hooker has recently shown that in the southeast corner of Australia,
where, apparently, there are many invaders from different quarters of
the globe, the endemic Australian species have been greatly reduced in
number. How much weight to attribute to these several considerations I
will not pretend to say; but conjointly they must limit in each country
the tendency to an indefinite augmentation of specific forms.

SUMMARY OF CHAPTER.

If under changing conditions of life organic beings present individual
differences in almost every part of their structure, and this cannot be
disputed; if there be, owing to their geometrical rate of increase, a
severe struggle for life at some age, season or year, and this certainly
cannot be disputed; then, considering the infinite complexity of the
relations of all organic beings to each other and to their conditions
of life, causing an infinite diversity in structure, constitution, and
habits, to be advantageous to them, it would be a most extraordinary
fact if no variations had ever occurred useful to each being's own
welfare, in the same manner as so many variations have occurred useful
to man. But if variations useful to any organic being ever do occur,
assuredly individuals thus characterised will have the best chance of
being preserved in the struggle for life; and from the strong principle
of inheritance, these will tend to produce offspring similarly
characterised. This principle of preservation, or the survival of the
fittest, I have called natural selection. It leads to the improvement
of each creature in relation to its organic and inorganic conditions of
life; and consequently, in most cases, to what must be regarded as an
advance in organisation. Nevertheless, low and simple forms will long
endure if well fitted for their simple conditions of life.

Natural selection, on the principle of qualities being inherited at
corresponding ages, can modify the egg, seed, or young as easily as the
adult. Among many animals sexual selection will have given its aid to
ordinary selection by assuring to the most vigorous and best adapted
males the greatest number of offspring. Sexual selection will also give
characters useful to the males alone in their struggles or rivalry with
other males; and these characters will be transmitted to one sex or to
both sexes, according to the form of inheritance which prevails.

Whether natural selection has really thus acted in adapting the various
forms of life to their several conditions and stations, must be judged
by the general tenour and balance of evidence given in the following
chapters. But we have already seen how it entails extinction; and how
largely extinction has acted in the world's history, geology plainly
declares. Natural selection, also, leads to divergence of character; for
the more organic beings diverge in structure, habits and constitution,
by so much the more can a large number be supported on the area, of
which we see proof by looking to the inhabitants of any small spot, and
to the productions naturalised in foreign lands. Therefore, during
the modification of the descendants of any one species, and during
the incessant struggle of all species to increase in numbers, the more
diversified the descendants become, the better will be their chance
of success in the battle for life. Thus the small differences
distinguishing varieties of the same species, steadily tend to increase,
till they equal the greater differences between species of the same
genus, or even of distinct genera.

We have seen that it is the common, the widely diffused, and widely
ranging species, belonging to the larger genera within each class, which
vary most; and these tend to transmit to their modified offspring
that superiority which now makes them dominant in their own countries.
Natural selection, as has just been remarked, leads to divergence of
character and to much extinction of the less improved and intermediate
forms of life. On these principles, the nature of the affinities, and
the generally well defined distinctions between the innumerable organic
beings in each class throughout the world, may be explained. It is a
truly wonderful fact--the wonder of which we are apt to overlook from
familiarity--that all animals and all plants throughout all time and
space should be related to each other in groups, subordinate to groups,
in the manner which we everywhere behold--namely, varieties of the same
species most closely related, species of the same genus less closely and
unequally related, forming sections and sub-genera, species of distinct
genera much less closely related, and genera related in different
degrees, forming sub-families, families, orders, sub-classes, and
classes. The several subordinate groups in any class cannot be ranked
in a single file, but seem clustered round points, and these round
other points, and so on in almost endless cycles. If species had been
independently created, no explanation would have been possible of this
kind of classification; but it is explained through inheritance and the
complex action of natural selection, entailing extinction and divergence
of character, as we have seen illustrated in the diagram.

The affinities of all the beings of the same class have sometimes been
represented by a great tree. I believe this simile largely speaks the
truth. The green and budding twigs may represent existing species; and
those produced during former years may represent the long succession
of extinct species. At each period of growth all the growing twigs
have tried to branch out on all sides, and to overtop and kill the
surrounding twigs and branches, in the same manner as species and groups
of species have at all times overmastered other species in the great
battle for life. The limbs divided into great branches, and these into
lesser and lesser branches, were themselves once, when the tree was
young, budding twigs; and this connexion of the former and present
buds by ramifying branches may well represent the classification of all
extinct and living species in groups subordinate to groups. Of the many
twigs which flourished when the tree was a mere bush, only two or three,
now grown into great branches, yet survive and bear the other branches;
so with the species which lived during long-past geological periods,
very few have left living and modified descendants. From the first
growth of the tree, many a limb and branch has decayed and dropped off;
and these fallen branches of various sizes may represent those whole
orders, families, and genera which have now no living representatives,
and which are known to us only in a fossil state. As we here and there
see a thin, straggling branch springing from a fork low down in a tree,
and which by some chance has been favoured and is still alive on its
summit, so we occasionally see an animal like the Ornithorhynchus or
Lepidosiren, which in some small degree connects by its affinities two
large branches of life, and which has apparently been saved from fatal
competition by having inhabited a protected station. As buds give rise
by growth to fresh buds, and these, if vigorous, branch out and overtop
on all sides many a feebler branch, so by generation I believe it has
been with the great Tree of Life, which fills with its dead and broken
branches the crust of the earth, and covers the surface with its
ever-branching and beautiful ramifications.




CHAPTER V. LAWS OF VARIATION.

 Effects of changed conditions--Use and disuse, combined with natural
 selection; organs of flight and of vision--Acclimatisation--Correlated
 variation--Compensation and economy of growth--False
 correlations--Multiple, rudimentary, and lowly organised structures
 variable--Parts developed in an unusual manner are highly variable:
 specific characters more variable than generic: secondary sexual
 characters variable--Species of the same genus vary in an analogous
 manner--Reversions to long-lost characters--Summary.


I have hitherto sometimes spoken as if the variations--so common and
multiform with organic beings under domestication, and in a lesser
degree with those under nature--were due to chance. This, of course is
a wholly incorrect expression, but it serves to acknowledge plainly
our ignorance of the cause of each particular variation. Some authors
believe it to be as much the function of the reproductive system to
produce individual differences, or slight deviations of structure, as
to make the child like its parents. But the fact of variations and
monstrosities occurring much more frequently under domestication than
under nature, and the greater variability of species having wide ranges
than of those with restricted ranges, lead to the conclusion that
variability is generally related to the conditions of life to which each
species has been exposed during several successive generations. In the
first chapter I attempted to show that changed conditions act in two
ways, directly on the whole organisation or on certain parts alone, and
indirectly through the reproductive system. In all cases there are two
factors, the nature of the organism, which is much the most important of
the two, and the nature of the conditions. The direct action of changed
conditions leads to definite or indefinite results. In the latter case
the organisation seems to become plastic, and we have much fluctuating
variability. In the former case the nature of the organism is such that
it yields readily, when subjected to certain conditions, and all, or
nearly all, the individuals become modified in the same way.

It is very difficult to decide how far changed conditions, such as of
climate, food, etc., have acted in a definite manner. There is reason
to believe that in the course of time the effects have been greater than
can be proved by clear evidence. But we may safely conclude that the
innumerable complex co-adaptations of structure, which we see throughout
nature between various organic beings, cannot be attributed simply to
such action. In the following cases the conditions seem to have produced
some slight definite effect: E. Forbes asserts that shells at their
southern limit, and when living in shallow water, are more brightly
coloured than those of the same species from further north or from a
greater depth; but this certainly does not always hold good. Mr. Gould
believes that birds of the same species are more brightly coloured under
a clear atmosphere, than when living near the coast or on islands; and
Wollaston is convinced that residence near the sea affects the colours
of insects. Moquin-Tandon gives a list of plants which, when growing
near the sea-shore, have their leaves in some degree fleshy, though not
elsewhere fleshy. These slightly varying organisms are interesting in
as far as they present characters analogous to those possessed by the
species which are confined to similar conditions.

When a variation is of the slightest use to any being, we cannot tell
how much to attribute to the accumulative action of natural selection,
and how much to the definite action of the conditions of life. Thus, it
is well known to furriers that animals of the same species have thicker
and better fur the further north they live; but who can tell how much of
this difference may be due to the warmest-clad individuals having been
favoured and preserved during many generations, and how much to the
action of the severe climate? For it would appear that climate has some
direct action on the hair of our domestic quadrupeds.

Instances could be given of similar varieties being produced from the
same species under external conditions of life as different as can well
be conceived; and, on the other hand, of dissimilar varieties being
produced under apparently the same external conditions. Again,
innumerable instances are known to every naturalist, of species keeping
true, or not varying at all, although living under the most opposite
climates. Such considerations as these incline me to lay less weight on
the direct action of the surrounding conditions, than on a tendency to
vary, due to causes of which we are quite ignorant.

In one sense the conditions of life may be said, not only to cause
variability, either directly or indirectly, but likewise to include
natural selection, for the conditions determine whether this or that
variety shall survive. But when man is the selecting agent, we clearly
see that the two elements of change are distinct; variability is in
some manner excited, but it is the will of man which accumulates the
variations in certain direction; and it is this latter agency which
answers to the survival of the fittest under nature.

EFFECTS OF THE INCREASED USE AND DISUSE OF PARTS, AS CONTROLLED BY
NATURAL SELECTION.

From the facts alluded to in the first chapter, I think there can be
no doubt that use in our domestic animals has strengthened and enlarged
certain parts, and disuse diminished them; and that such modifications
are inherited. Under free nature we have no standard of comparison by
which to judge of the effects of long-continued use or disuse, for we
know not the parent-forms; but many animals possess structures which
can be best explained by the effects of disuse. As Professor Owen has
remarked, there is no greater anomaly in nature than a bird that cannot
fly; yet there are several in this state. The logger-headed duck of
South America can only flap along the surface of the water, and has its
wings in nearly the same condition as the domestic Aylesbury duck: it is
a remarkable fact that the young birds, according to Mr. Cunningham, can
fly, while the adults have lost this power. As the larger ground-feeding
birds seldom take flight except to escape danger, it is probable that
the nearly wingless condition of several birds, now inhabiting or which
lately inhabited several oceanic islands, tenanted by no beasts of prey,
has been caused by disuse. The ostrich indeed inhabits continents, and
is exposed to danger from which it cannot escape by flight, but it
can defend itself, by kicking its enemies, as efficiently as many
quadrupeds. We may believe that the progenitor of the ostrich genus had
habits like those of the bustard, and that, as the size and weight of
its body were increased during successive generations, its legs were
used more and its wings less, until they became incapable of flight.

Kirby has remarked (and I have observed the same fact) that the anterior
tarsi, or feet, of many male dung-feeding beetles are often broken off;
he examined seventeen specimens in his own collection, and not one had
even a relic left. In the Onites apelles the tarsi are so habitually
lost that the insect has been described as not having them. In some
other genera they are present, but in a rudimentary condition. In the
Ateuchus or sacred beetle of the Egyptians, they are totally deficient.
The evidence that accidental mutilations can be inherited is at present
not decisive; but the remarkable cases observed by Brown-Sequard in
guinea-pigs, of the inherited effects of operations, should make us
cautious in denying this tendency. Hence, it will perhaps be safest to
look at the entire absence of the anterior tarsi in Ateuchus, and their
rudimentary condition in some other genera, not as cases of inherited
mutilations, but as due to the effects of long-continued disuse; for
as many dung-feeding beetles are generally found with their tarsi lost,
this must happen early in life; therefore the tarsi cannot be of much
importance or be much used by these insects.

In some cases we might easily put down to disuse modifications of
structure which are wholly, or mainly due to natural selection. Mr.
Wollaston has discovered the remarkable fact that 200 beetles, out of
the 550 species (but more are now known) inhabiting Madeira, are so far
deficient in wings that they cannot fly; and that, of the twenty-nine
endemic genera, no less than twenty-three have all their species in
this condition! Several facts, namely, that beetles in many parts of the
world are very frequently blown to sea and perish; that the beetles in
Madeira, as observed by Mr. Wollaston, lie much concealed, until the
wind lulls and the sun shines; that the proportion of wingless beetles
is larger on the exposed Desertas than in Madeira itself; and especially
the extraordinary fact, so strongly insisted on by Mr. Wollaston, that
certain large groups of beetles, elsewhere excessively numerous, which
absolutely require the use of their wings, are here almost entirely
absent. These several considerations make me believe that the wingless
condition of so many Madeira beetles is mainly due to the action of
natural selection, combined probably with disuse. For during many
successive generations each individual beetle which flew least, either
from its wings having been ever so little less perfectly developed or
from indolent habit, will have had the best chance of surviving from not
being blown out to sea; and, on the other hand, those beetles which most
readily took to flight would oftenest have been blown to sea, and thus
destroyed.

The insects in Madeira which are not ground-feeders, and which, as
certain flower-feeding coleoptera and lepidoptera, must habitually use
their wings to gain their subsistence, have, as Mr. Wollaston suspects,
their wings not at all reduced, but even enlarged. This is quite
compatible with the action of natural selection. For when a new insect
first arrived on the island, the tendency of natural selection to
enlarge or to reduce the wings, would depend on whether a greater number
of individuals were saved by successfully battling with the winds, or
by giving up the attempt and rarely or never flying. As with mariners
shipwrecked near a coast, it would have been better for the good
swimmers if they had been able to swim still further, whereas it would
have been better for the bad swimmers if they had not been able to swim
at all and had stuck to the wreck.

The eyes of moles and of some burrowing rodents are rudimentary in size,
and in some cases are quite covered by skin and fur. This state of the
eyes is probably due to gradual reduction from disuse, but aided
perhaps by natural selection. In South America, a burrowing rodent, the
tuco-tuco, or Ctenomys, is even more subterranean in its habits than the
mole; and I was assured by a Spaniard, who had often caught them, that
they were frequently blind. One which I kept alive was certainly in
this condition, the cause, as appeared on dissection, having been
inflammation of the nictitating membrane. As frequent inflammation of
the eyes must be injurious to any animal, and as eyes are certainly not
necessary to animals having subterranean habits, a reduction in their
size, with the adhesion of the eyelids and growth of fur over them,
might in such case be an advantage; and if so, natural selection would
aid the effects of disuse.

It is well known that several animals, belonging to the most different
classes, which inhabit the caves of Carniola and Kentucky, are blind. In
some of the crabs the foot-stalk for the eye remains, though the eye is
gone; the stand for the telescope is there, though the telescope with
its glasses has been lost. As it is difficult to imagine that eyes,
though useless, could be in any way injurious to animals living in
darkness, their loss may be attributed to disuse. In one of the blind
animals, namely, the cave-rat (Neotoma), two of which were captured by
Professor Silliman at above half a mile distance from the mouth of
the cave, and therefore not in the profoundest depths, the eyes were
lustrous and of large size; and these animals, as I am informed by
Professor Silliman, after having been exposed for about a month to a
graduated light, acquired a dim perception of objects.

It is difficult to imagine conditions of life more similar than deep
limestone caverns under a nearly similar climate; so that, in accordance
with the old view of the blind animals having been separately created
for the American and European caverns, very close similarity in their
organisation and affinities might have been expected. This is certainly
not the case if we look at the two whole faunas; with respect to the
insects alone, Schiodte has remarked: "We are accordingly prevented
from considering the entire phenomenon in any other light than something
purely local, and the similarity which is exhibited in a few forms
between the Mammoth Cave (in Kentucky) and the caves in Carniola,
otherwise than as a very plain expression of that analogy which subsists
generally between the fauna of Europe and of North America." On my view
we must suppose that American animals, having in most cases ordinary
powers of vision, slowly migrated by successive generations from the
outer world into the deeper and deeper recesses of the Kentucky caves,
as did European animals into the caves of Europe. We have some evidence
of this gradation of habit; for, as Schiodte remarks: "We accordingly
look upon the subterranean faunas as small ramifications which have
penetrated into the earth from the geographically limited faunas of the
adjacent tracts, and which, as they extended themselves into darkness,
have been accommodated to surrounding circumstances. Animals not
far remote from ordinary forms, prepare the transition from light to
darkness. Next follow those that are constructed for twilight; and, last
of all, those destined for total darkness, and whose formation is quite
peculiar." These remarks of Schiodte's it should be understood, apply
not to the same, but to distinct species. By the time that an animal had
reached, after numberless generations, the deepest recesses, disuse
will on this view have more or less perfectly obliterated its eyes, and
natural selection will often have effected other changes, such as an
increase in the length of the antennae or palpi, as a compensation for
blindness. Notwithstanding such modifications, we might expect still to
see in the cave-animals of America, affinities to the other inhabitants
of that continent, and in those of Europe to the inhabitants of the
European continent. And this is the case with some of the American
cave-animals, as I hear from Professor Dana; and some of the European
cave-insects are very closely allied to those of the surrounding
country. It would be difficult to give any rational explanation of the
affinities of the blind cave-animals to the other inhabitants of the
two continents on the ordinary view of their independent creation. That
several of the inhabitants of the caves of the Old and New Worlds should
be closely related, we might expect from the well-known relationship
of most of their other productions. As a blind species of Bathyscia is
found in abundance on shady rocks far from caves, the loss of vision in
the cave species of this one genus has probably had no relation to its
dark habitation; for it is natural that an insect already deprived of
vision should readily become adapted to dark caverns. Another blind
genus (Anophthalmus) offers this remarkable peculiarity, that the
species, as Mr. Murray observes, have not as yet been found anywhere
except in caves; yet those which inhabit the several caves of Europe and
America are distinct; but it is possible that the progenitors of these
several species, while they were furnished with eyes, may formerly have
ranged over both continents, and then have become extinct, excepting in
their present secluded abodes. Far from feeling surprise that some of
the cave-animals should be very anomalous, as Agassiz has remarked in
regard to the blind fish, the Amblyopsis, and as is the case with the
blind Proteus, with reference to the reptiles of Europe, I am only
surprised that more wrecks of ancient life have not been preserved,
owing to the less severe competition to which the scanty inhabitants of
these dark abodes will have been exposed.

ACCLIMATISATION.

Habit is hereditary with plants, as in the period of flowering, in the
time of sleep, in the amount of rain requisite for seeds to germinate,
etc., and this leads me to say a few words on acclimatisation. As it
is extremely common for distinct species belonging to the same genus to
inhabit hot and cold countries, if it be true that all the species of
the same genus are descended from a single parent-form, acclimatisation
must be readily effected during a long course of descent. It is
notorious that each species is adapted to the climate of its own home:
species from an arctic or even from a temperate region cannot endure a
tropical climate, or conversely. So again, many succulent plants cannot
endure a damp climate. But the degree of adaptation of species to the
climates under which they live is often overrated. We may infer this
from our frequent inability to predict whether or not an imported plant
will endure our climate, and from the number of plants and animals
brought from different countries which are here perfectly healthy. We
have reason to believe that species in a state of nature are closely
limited in their ranges by the competition of other organic beings quite
as much as, or more than, by adaptation to particular climates. But
whether or not this adaptation is in most cases very close, we have
evidence with some few plants, of their becoming, to a certain extent,
naturally habituated to different temperatures; that is, they become
acclimatised: thus the pines and rhododendrons, raised from seed
collected by Dr. Hooker from the same species growing at different
heights on the Himalayas, were found to possess in this country
different constitutional powers of resisting cold. Mr. Thwaites informs
me that he has observed similar facts in Ceylon; analogous observations
have been made by Mr. H.C. Watson on European species of plants brought
from the Azores to England; and I could give other cases. In regard to
animals, several authentic instances could be adduced of species having
largely extended, within historical times, their range from warmer to
colder latitudes, and conversely; but we do not positively know that
these animals were strictly adapted to their native climate, though in
all ordinary cases we assume such to be the case; nor do we know that
they have subsequently become specially acclimatised to their new homes,
so as to be better fitted for them than they were at first.

As we may infer that our domestic animals were originally chosen by
uncivilised man because they were useful, and because they bred readily
under confinement, and not because they were subsequently found capable
of far-extended transportation, the common and extraordinary capacity
in our domestic animals of not only withstanding the most different
climates, but of being perfectly fertile (a far severer test) under
them, may be used as an argument that a large proportion of other
animals now in a state of nature could easily be brought to bear widely
different climates. We must not, however, push the foregoing argument
too far, on account of the probable origin of some of our domestic
animals from several wild stocks: the blood, for instance, of a tropical
and arctic wolf may perhaps be mingled in our domestic breeds. The rat
and mouse cannot be considered as domestic animals, but they have been
transported by man to many parts of the world, and now have a far wider
range than any other rodent; for they live under the cold climate of
Faroe in the north and of the Falklands in the south, and on many an
island in the torrid zones. Hence adaptation to any special climate may
be looked at as a quality readily grafted on an innate wide flexibility
of constitution, common to most animals. On this view, the capacity of
enduring the most different climates by man himself and by his domestic
animals, and the fact of the extinct elephant and rhinoceros having
formerly endured a glacial climate, whereas the living species are now
all tropical or sub-tropical in their habits, ought not to be looked
at as anomalies, but as examples of a very common flexibility of
constitution, brought, under peculiar circumstances, into action.

How much of the acclimatisation of species to any peculiar climate is
due to mere habit, and how much to the natural selection of varieties
having different innate constitutions, and how much to both means
combined, is an obscure question. That habit or custom has some
influence, I must believe, both from analogy and from the incessant
advice given in agricultural works, even in the ancient Encyclopaedias
of China, to be very cautious in transporting animals from one district
to another. And as it is not likely that man should have succeeded in
selecting so many breeds and sub-breeds with constitutions specially
fitted for their own districts, the result must, I think, be due to
habit. On the other hand, natural selection would inevitably tend to
preserve those individuals which were born with constitutions best
adapted to any country which they inhabited. In treatises on many kinds
of cultivated plants, certain varieties are said to withstand certain
climates better than others; this is strikingly shown in works on
fruit-trees published in the United States, in which certain varieties
are habitually recommended for the northern and others for the southern
states; and as most of these varieties are of recent origin, they cannot
owe their constitutional differences to habit. The case of the Jerusalem
artichoke, which is never propagated in England by seed, and of which,
consequently, new varieties have not been produced, has even been
advanced, as proving that acclimatisation cannot be effected, for it
is now as tender as ever it was! The case, also, of the kidney-bean has
been often cited for a similar purpose, and with much greater weight;
but until some one will sow, during a score of generations, his
kidney-beans so early that a very large proportion are destroyed by
frost, and then collect seed from the few survivors, with care
to prevent accidental crosses, and then again get seed from these
seedlings, with the same precautions, the experiment cannot be said to
have been even tried. Nor let it be supposed that differences in the
constitution of seedling kidney-beans never appear, for an account has
been published how much more hardy some seedlings are than others; and
of this fact I have myself observed striking instances.

On the whole, we may conclude that habit, or use and disuse, have,
in some cases, played a considerable part in the modification of the
constitution and structure; but that the effects have often been largely
combined with, and sometimes overmastered by, the natural selection of
innate variations.

CORRELATED VARIATION.

I mean by this expression that the whole organisation is so tied
together, during its growth and development, that when slight variations
in any one part occur and are accumulated through natural selection,
other parts become modified. This is a very important subject, most
imperfectly understood, and no doubt wholly different classes of facts
may be here easily confounded together. We shall presently see that
simple inheritance often gives the false appearance of correlation. One
of the most obvious real cases is, that variations of structure arising
in the young or larvae naturally tend to affect the structure of the
mature animal. The several parts which are homologous, and which, at
an early embryonic period, are identical in structure, and which are
necessarily exposed to similar conditions, seem eminently liable to vary
in a like manner: we see this in the right and left sides of the body
varying in the same manner; in the front and hind legs, and even in the
jaws and limbs, varying together, for the lower jaw is believed by some
anatomists to be homologous with the limbs. These tendencies, I do not
doubt, may be mastered more or less completely by natural selection:
thus a family of stags once existed with an antler only on one side; and
if this had been of any great use to the breed, it might probably have
been rendered permanent by natural selection.

Homologous parts, as has been remarked by some authors, tend to cohere;
this is often seen in monstrous plants: and nothing is more common than
the union of homologous parts in normal structures, as in the union of
the petals into a tube. Hard parts seem to affect the form of adjoining
soft parts; it is believed by some authors that with birds the diversity
in the shape of the pelvis causes the remarkable diversity in the shape
of the kidneys. Others believe that the shape of the pelvis in the human
mother influences by pressure the shape of the head of the child. In
snakes, according to Schlegel, the shape of the body and the manner
of swallowing determine the position and form of several of the most
important viscera.

The nature of the bond is frequently quite obscure. M. Is. Geoffroy St.
Hilaire has forcibly remarked that certain malconformations frequently,
and that others rarely, coexist without our being able to assign any
reason. What can be more singular than the relation in cats between
complete whiteness and blue eyes with deafness, or between the
tortoise-shell colour and the female sex; or in pigeons, between their
feathered feet and skin betwixt the outer toes, or between the presence
of more or less down on the young pigeon when first hatched, with the
future colour of its plumage; or, again, the relation between the hair
and the teeth in the naked Turkish dog, though here no doubt homology
comes into play? With respect to this latter case of correlation, I
think it can hardly be accidental that the two orders of mammals which
are most abnormal in their dermal covering, viz., Cetacea (whales) and
Edentata (armadilloes, scaly ant-eaters, etc.), are likewise on the
whole the most abnormal in their teeth, but there are so many exceptions
to this rule, as Mr. Mivart has remarked, that it has little value.

I know of no case better adapted to show the importance of the laws of
correlation and variation, independently of utility, and therefore of
natural selection, than that of the difference between the outer and
inner flowers in some Compositous and Umbelliferous plants. Everyone is
familiar with the difference between the ray and central florets of, for
instance, the daisy, and this difference is often accompanied with the
partial or complete abortion of the reproductive organs. But in some
of these plants the seeds also differ in shape and sculpture. These
differences have sometimes been attributed to the pressure of the
involucra on the florets, or to their mutual pressure, and the shape of
the seeds in the ray-florets of some Compositae countenances this idea;
but with the Umbelliferae it is by no means, as Dr. Hooker informs me,
the species with the densest heads which most frequently differ in their
inner and outer flowers. It might have been thought that the development
of the ray-petals, by drawing nourishment from the reproductive organs
causes their abortion; but this can hardly be the sole case, for in some
Compositae the seeds of the outer and inner florets differ, without any
difference in the corolla. Possibly these several differences may be
connected with the different flow of nutriment towards the central and
external flowers. We know, at least, that with irregular flowers those
nearest to the axis are most subject to peloria, that is to become
abnormally symmetrical. I may add, as an instance of this fact, and as
a striking case of correlation, that in many pelargoniums the two upper
petals in the central flower of the truss often lose their patches
of darker colour; and when this occurs, the adherent nectary is quite
aborted, the central flower thus becoming peloric or regular. When the
colour is absent from only one of the two upper petals, the nectary is
not quite aborted but is much shortened.

With respect to the development of the corolla, Sprengel's idea that
the ray-florets serve to attract insects, whose agency is highly
advantageous, or necessary for the fertilisation of these plants, is
highly probable; and if so, natural selection may have come into
play. But with respect to the seeds, it seems impossible that their
differences in shape, which are not always correlated with any
difference in the corolla, can be in any way beneficial; yet in the
Umbelliferae these differences are of such apparent importance--the
seeds being sometimes orthospermous in the exterior flowers and
coelospermous in the central flowers--that the elder De Candolle founded
his main divisions in the order on such characters. Hence modifications
of structure, viewed by systematists as of high value, may be wholly due
to the laws of variation and correlation, without being, as far as we
can judge, of the slightest service to the species.

We may often falsely attribute to correlated variation structures which
are common to whole groups of species, and which in truth are simply
due to inheritance; for an ancient progenitor may have acquired through
natural selection some one modification in structure, and, after
thousands of generations, some other and independent modification; and
these two modifications, having been transmitted to a whole group of
descendants with diverse habits, would naturally be thought to be in
some necessary manner correlated. Some other correlations are apparently
due to the manner in which natural selection can alone act. For
instance, Alph. De Candolle has remarked that winged seeds are never
found in fruits which do not open; I should explain this rule by
the impossibility of seeds gradually becoming winged through natural
selection, unless the capsules were open; for in this case alone could
the seeds, which were a little better adapted to be wafted by the wind,
gain an advantage over others less well fitted for wide dispersal.

COMPENSATION AND ECONOMY OF GROWTH.

The elder Geoffroy and Goethe propounded, at about the same time, their
law of compensation or balancement of growth; or, as Goethe expressed
it, "in order to spend on one side, nature is forced to economise on
the other side." I think this holds true to a certain extent with our
domestic productions: if nourishment flows to one part or organ in
excess, it rarely flows, at least in excess, to another part; thus it is
difficult to get a cow to give much milk and to fatten readily. The same
varieties of the cabbage do not yield abundant and nutritious foliage
and a copious supply of oil-bearing seeds. When the seeds in our fruits
become atrophied, the fruit itself gains largely in size and quality.
In our poultry, a large tuft of feathers on the head is generally
accompanied by a diminished comb, and a large beard by diminished
wattles. With species in a state of nature it can hardly be maintained
that the law is of universal application; but many good observers, more
especially botanists, believe in its truth. I will not, however, here
give any instances, for I see hardly any way of distinguishing between
the effects, on the one hand, of a part being largely developed through
natural selection and another and adjoining part being reduced by the
same process or by disuse, and, on the other hand, the actual withdrawal
of nutriment from one part owing to the excess of growth in another and
adjoining part.

I suspect, also, that some of the cases of compensation which have been
advanced, and likewise some other facts, may be merged under a more
general principle, namely, that natural selection is continually
trying to economise in every part of the organisation. If under changed
conditions of life a structure, before useful, becomes less useful, its
diminution will be favoured, for it will profit the individual not to
have its nutriment wasted in building up a useless structure. I can
thus only understand a fact with which I was much struck when examining
cirripedes, and of which many other instances could be given: namely,
that when a cirripede is parasitic within another cirripede and is thus
protected, it loses more or less completely its own shell or carapace.
This is the case with the male Ibla, and in a truly extraordinary manner
with the Proteolepas: for the carapace in all other cirripedes consists
of the three highly important anterior segments of the head enormously
developed, and furnished with great nerves and muscles; but in the
parasitic and protected Proteolepas, the whole anterior part of the
head is reduced to the merest rudiment attached to the bases of the
prehensile antennae. Now the saving of a large and complex structure,
when rendered superfluous, would be a decided advantage to each
successive individual of the species; for in the struggle for life
to which every animal is exposed, each would have a better chance of
supporting itself, by less nutriment being wasted.

Thus, as I believe, natural selection will tend in the long run to
reduce any part of the organisation, as soon as it becomes, through
changed habits, superfluous, without by any means causing some other
part to be largely developed in a corresponding degree. And conversely,
that natural selection may perfectly well succeed in largely developing
an organ without requiring as a necessary compensation the reduction of
some adjoining part.

MULTIPLE, RUDIMENTARY, AND LOWLY-ORGANISED STRUCTURES ARE VARIABLE.

It seems to be a rule, as remarked by Is. Geoffroy St. Hilaire, both
with varieties and species, that when any part or organ is repeated
many times in the same individual (as the vertebrae in snakes, and the
stamens in polyandrous flowers) the number is variable; whereas the
number of the same part or organ, when it occurs in lesser numbers,
is constant. The same author as well as some botanists, have further
remarked that multiple parts are extremely liable to vary in structure.
As "vegetative repetition," to use Professor Owen's expression, is
a sign of low organisation; the foregoing statements accord with the
common opinion of naturalists, that beings which stand low in the scale
of nature are more variable than those which are higher. I presume that
lowness here means that the several parts of the organisation have been
but little specialised for particular functions; and as long as the same
part has to perform diversified work, we can perhaps see why it
should remain variable, that is, why natural selection should not have
preserved or rejected each little deviation of form so carefully as when
the part has to serve for some one special purpose. In the same way that
a knife which has to cut all sorts of things may be of almost any shape;
whilst a tool for some particular purpose must be of some particular
shape. Natural selection, it should never be forgotten, can act solely
through and for the advantage of each being.

Rudimentary parts, as is generally admitted, are apt to be highly
variable. We shall have to recur to this subject; and I will here only
add that their variability seems to result from their uselessness,
and consequently from natural selection having had no power to check
deviations in their structure.

A PART DEVELOPED IN ANY SPECIES IN AN EXTRAORDINARY DEGREE OR MANNER,
IN COMPARISON WITH THE SAME PART IN ALLIED SPECIES, TENDS TO BE HIGHLY
VARIABLE.

Several years ago I was much struck by a remark to the above effect made
by Mr. Waterhouse. Professor Owen, also, seems to have come to a nearly
similar conclusion. It is hopeless to attempt to convince any one of the
truth of the above proposition without giving the long array of facts
which I have collected, and which cannot possibly be here introduced. I
can only state my conviction that it is a rule of high generality. I
am aware of several causes of error, but I hope that I have made due
allowances for them. It should be understood that the rule by no means
applies to any part, however unusually developed, unless it be unusually
developed in one species or in a few species in comparison with the same
part in many closely allied species. Thus, the wing of the bat is a most
abnormal structure in the class of mammals; but the rule would not apply
here, because the whole group of bats possesses wings; it would apply
only if some one species had wings developed in a remarkable manner in
comparison with the other species of the same genus. The rule applies
very strongly in the case of secondary sexual characters, when displayed
in any unusual manner. The term, secondary sexual characters, used by
Hunter, relates to characters which are attached to one sex, but are
not directly connected with the act of reproduction. The rule applies
to males and females; but more rarely to females, as they seldom offer
remarkable secondary sexual characters. The rule being so plainly
applicable in the case of secondary sexual characters, may be due to the
great variability of these characters, whether or not displayed in any
unusual manner--of which fact I think there can be little doubt. But
that our rule is not confined to secondary sexual characters is clearly
shown in the case of hermaphrodite cirripedes; I particularly attended
to Mr. Waterhouse's remark, whilst investigating this order, and I am
fully convinced that the rule almost always holds good. I shall, in a
future work, give a list of all the more remarkable cases. I will here
give only one, as it illustrates the rule in its largest application.
The opercular valves of sessile cirripedes (rock barnacles) are, in
every sense of the word, very important structures, and they differ
extremely little even in distinct genera; but in the several species
of one genus, Pyrgoma, these valves present a marvellous amount of
diversification; the homologous valves in the different species being
sometimes wholly unlike in shape; and the amount of variation in the
individuals of the same species is so great that it is no exaggeration
to state that the varieties of the same species differ more from each
other in the characters derived from these important organs, than do the
species belonging to other distinct genera.

As with birds the individuals of the same species, inhabiting the same
country, vary extremely little, I have particularly attended to them;
and the rule certainly seems to hold good in this class. I cannot make
out that it applies to plants, and this would have seriously shaken my
belief in its truth, had not the great variability in plants made it
particularly difficult to compare their relative degrees of variability.

When we see any part or organ developed in a remarkable degree or manner
in a species, the fair presumption is that it is of high importance
to that species: nevertheless it is in this case eminently liable to
variation. Why should this be so? On the view that each species has been
independently created, with all its parts as we now see them, I can see
no explanation. But on the view that groups of species are descended
from some other species, and have been modified through natural
selection, I think we can obtain some light. First let me make some
preliminary remarks. If, in our domestic animals, any part or the
whole animal be neglected, and no selection be applied, that part (for
instance, the comb in the Dorking fowl) or the whole breed will cease to
have a uniform character: and the breed may be said to be degenerating.
In rudimentary organs, and in those which have been but little
specialised for any particular purpose, and perhaps in polymorphic
groups, we see a nearly parallel case; for in such cases natural
selection either has not or cannot come into full play, and thus the
organisation is left in a fluctuating condition. But what here more
particularly concerns us is, that those points in our domestic animals,
which at the present time are undergoing rapid change by continued
selection, are also eminently liable to variation. Look at the
individuals of the same breed of the pigeon; and see what a prodigious
amount of difference there is in the beak of tumblers, in the beak and
wattle of carriers, in the carriage and tail of fantails, etc., these
being the points now mainly attended to by English fanciers. Even in the
same sub-breed, as in that of the short-faced tumbler, it is notoriously
difficult to breed nearly perfect birds, many departing widely from the
standard. There may truly be said to be a constant struggle going on
between, on the one hand, the tendency to reversion to a less perfect
state, as well as an innate tendency to new variations, and, on the
other hand, the power of steady selection to keep the breed true. In
the long run selection gains the day, and we do not expect to fail so
completely as to breed a bird as coarse as a common tumbler pigeon from
a good short-faced strain. But as long as selection is rapidly going
on, much variability in the parts undergoing modification may always be
expected.

Now let us turn to nature. When a part has been developed in an
extraordinary manner in any one species, compared with the other species
of the same genus, we may conclude that this part has undergone an
extraordinary amount of modification since the period when the several
species branched off from the common progenitor of the genus. This
period will seldom be remote in any extreme degree, as species rarely
endure for more than one geological period. An extraordinary amount of
modification implies an unusually large and long-continued amount of
variability, which has continually been accumulated by natural
selection for the benefit of the species. But as the variability of
the extraordinarily developed part or organ has been so great and
long-continued within a period not excessively remote, we might, as a
general rule, still expect to find more variability in such parts than
in other parts of the organisation which have remained for a much longer
period nearly constant. And this, I am convinced, is the case. That the
struggle between natural selection on the one hand, and the tendency to
reversion and variability on the other hand, will in the course of
time cease; and that the most abnormally developed organs may be made
constant, I see no reason to doubt. Hence, when an organ, however
abnormal it may be, has been transmitted in approximately the same
condition to many modified descendants, as in the case of the wing of
the bat, it must have existed, according to our theory, for an immense
period in nearly the same state; and thus it has come not to be more
variable than any other structure. It is only in those cases in which
the modification has been comparatively recent and extraordinarily great
that we ought to find the GENERATIVE VARIABILITY, as it may be called,
still present in a high degree. For in this case the variability
will seldom as yet have been fixed by the continued selection of the
individuals varying in the required manner and degree, and by the
continued rejection of those tending to revert to a former and less
modified condition.

SPECIFIC CHARACTERS MORE VARIABLE THAN GENERIC CHARACTERS.

The principle discussed under the last heading may be applied to our
present subject. It is notorious that specific characters are more
variable than generic. To explain by a simple example what is meant: if
in a large genus of plants some species had blue flowers and some had
red, the colour would be only a specific character, and no one would be
surprised at one of the blue species varying into red, or conversely;
but if all the species had blue flowers, the colour would become
a generic character, and its variation would be a more unusual
circumstance. I have chosen this example because the explanation which
most naturalists would advance is not here applicable, namely, that
specific characters are more variable than generic, because they are
taken from parts of less physiological importance than those commonly
used for classing genera. I believe this explanation is partly, yet only
indirectly, true; I shall, however, have to return to this point in
the chapter on Classification. It would be almost superfluous to adduce
evidence in support of the statement, that ordinary specific characters
are more variable than generic; but with respect to important
characters, I have repeatedly noticed in works on natural history, that
when an author remarks with surprise that some important organ or part,
which is generally very constant throughout a large group of species,
DIFFERS considerably in closely-allied species, it is often VARIABLE
in the individuals of the same species. And this fact shows that a
character, which is generally of generic value, when it sinks in value
and becomes only of specific value, often becomes variable, though its
physiological importance may remain the same. Something of the same kind
applies to monstrosities: at least Is. Geoffroy St. Hilaire apparently
entertains no doubt, that the more an organ normally differs in the
different species of the same group, the more subject it is to anomalies
in the individuals.

On the ordinary view of each species having been independently created,
why should that part of the structure, which differs from the same
part in other independently created species of the same genus, be
more variable than those parts which are closely alike in the several
species? I do not see that any explanation can be given. But on the
view that species are only strongly marked and fixed varieties, we might
expect often to find them still continuing to vary in those parts of
their structure which have varied within a moderately recent period, and
which have thus come to differ. Or to state the case in another manner:
the points in which all the species of a genus resemble each other, and
in which they differ from allied genera, are called generic characters;
and these characters may be attributed to inheritance from a common
progenitor, for it can rarely have happened that natural selection will
have modified several distinct species, fitted to more or less widely
different habits, in exactly the same manner: and as these so-called
generic characters have been inherited from before the period when the
several species first branched off from their common progenitor, and
subsequently have not varied or come to differ in any degree, or only in
a slight degree, it is not probable that they should vary at the present
day. On the other hand, the points in which species differ from other
species of the same genus are called specific characters; and as these
specific characters have varied and come to differ since the period when
the species branched off from a common progenitor, it is probable
that they should still often be in some degree variable--at least more
variable than those parts of the organisation which have for a very long
period remained constant.

SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS VARIABLE.

I think it will be admitted by naturalists, without my entering on
details, that secondary sexual characters are highly variable. It will
also be admitted that species of the same group differ from each other
more widely in their secondary sexual characters, than in other parts
of their organisation; compare, for instance, the amount of difference
between the males of gallinaceous birds, in which secondary sexual
characters are strongly displayed, with the amount of difference between
the females. The cause of the original variability of these characters
is not manifest; but we can see why they should not have been rendered
as constant and uniform as others, for they are accumulated by sexual
selection, which is less rigid in its action than ordinary selection,
as it does not entail death, but only gives fewer offspring to the
less favoured males. Whatever the cause may be of the variability
of secondary sexual characters, as they are highly variable, sexual
selection will have had a wide scope for action, and may thus have
succeeded in giving to the species of the same group a greater amount of
difference in these than in other respects.

It is a remarkable fact, that the secondary differences between the two
sexes of the same species are generally displayed in the very same parts
of the organisation in which the species of the same genus differ from
each other. Of this fact I will give in illustration the first two
instances which happen to stand on my list; and as the differences in
these cases are of a very unusual nature, the relation can hardly be
accidental. The same number of joints in the tarsi is a character common
to very large groups of beetles, but in the Engidae, as Westwood has
remarked, the number varies greatly and the number likewise differs in
the two sexes of the same species. Again in the fossorial hymenoptera,
the neuration of the wings is a character of the highest importance,
because common to large groups; but in certain genera the neuration
differs in the different species, and likewise in the two sexes of the
same species. Sir J. Lubbock has recently remarked, that several minute
crustaceans offer excellent illustrations of this law. "In Pontella,
for instance, the sexual characters are afforded mainly by the anterior
antennae and by the fifth pair of legs: the specific differences also
are principally given by these organs." This relation has a clear
meaning on my view: I look at all the species of the same genus as
having as certainly descended from the same progenitor, as have the two
sexes of any one species. Consequently, whatever part of the structure
of the common progenitor, or of its early descendants, became variable;
variations of this part would, it is highly probable, be taken advantage
of by natural and sexual selection, in order to fit the several places
in the economy of nature, and likewise to fit the two sexes of the same
species to each other, or to fit the males to struggle with other males
for the possession of the females.

Finally, then, I conclude that the greater variability of specific
characters, or those which distinguish species from species, than of
generic characters, or those which are possessed by all the species;
that the frequent extreme variability of any part which is developed in
a species in an extraordinary manner in comparison with the same part in
its congeners; and the slight degree of variability in a part, however
extraordinarily it may be developed, if it be common to a whole group of
species; that the great variability of secondary sexual characters and
their great difference in closely allied species; that secondary sexual
and ordinary specific differences are generally displayed in the
same parts of the organisation, are all principles closely connected
together. All being mainly due to the species of the same group being
the descendants of a common progenitor, from whom they have inherited
much in common, to parts which have recently and largely varied being
more likely still to go on varying than parts which have long been
inherited and have not varied, to natural selection having more or less
completely, according to the lapse of time, overmastered the tendency
to reversion and to further variability, to sexual selection being
less rigid than ordinary selection, and to variations in the same parts
having been accumulated by natural and sexual selection, and thus having
been adapted for secondary sexual, and for ordinary purposes.

DISTINCT SPECIES PRESENT ANALOGOUS VARIATIONS, SO THAT A VARIETY OF
ONE SPECIES OFTEN ASSUMES A CHARACTER PROPER TO AN ALLIED SPECIES, OR
REVERTS TO SOME OF THE CHARACTERS OF AN EARLY PROGENITOR.

These propositions will be most readily understood by looking to our
domestic races. The most distinct breeds of the pigeon, in countries
widely apart, present sub-varieties with reversed feathers on the
head, and with feathers on the feet, characters not possessed by the
aboriginal rock-pigeon; these then are analogous variations in two or
more distinct races. The frequent presence of fourteen or even
sixteen tail-feathers in the pouter may be considered as a variation
representing the normal structure of another race, the fantail. I
presume that no one will doubt that all such analogous variations are
due to the several races of the pigeon having inherited from a common
parent the same constitution and tendency to variation, when acted on by
similar unknown influences. In the vegetable kingdom we have a case of
analogous variation, in the enlarged stems, or as commonly called roots,
of the Swedish turnip and ruta-baga, plants which several botanists rank
as varieties produced by cultivation from a common parent: if this
be not so, the case will then be one of analogous variation in two
so-called distinct species; and to these a third may be added, namely,
the common turnip. According to the ordinary view of each species having
been independently created, we should have to attribute this similarity
in the enlarged stems of these three plants, not to the vera causa
of community of descent, and a consequent tendency to vary in a like
manner, but to three separate yet closely related acts of creation. Many
similar cases of analogous variation have been observed by Naudin in the
great gourd family, and by various authors in our cereals. Similar
cases occurring with insects under natural conditions have lately been
discussed with much ability by Mr. Walsh, who has grouped them under his
law of equable variability.

With pigeons, however, we have another case, namely, the occasional
appearance in all the breeds, of slaty-blue birds with two black bars
on the wings, white loins, a bar at the end of the tail, with the outer
feathers externally edged near their bases with white. As all these
marks are characteristic of the parent rock-pigeon, I presume that no
one will doubt that this is a case of reversion, and not of a new yet
analogous variation appearing in the several breeds. We may, I think,
confidently come to this conclusion, because, as we have seen, these
coloured marks are eminently liable to appear in the crossed offspring
of two distinct and differently coloured breeds; and in this case there
is nothing in the external conditions of life to cause the reappearance
of the slaty-blue, with the several marks, beyond the influence of the
mere act of crossing on the laws of inheritance.

No doubt it is a very surprising fact that characters should reappear
after having been lost for many, probably for hundreds of generations.
But when a breed has been crossed only once by some other breed, the
offspring occasionally show for many generations a tendency to revert in
character to the foreign breed--some say, for a dozen or even a score of
generations. After twelve generations, the proportion of blood, to use a
common expression, from one ancestor, is only 1 in 2048; and yet, as we
see, it is generally believed that a tendency to reversion is retained
by this remnant of foreign blood. In a breed which has not been
crossed, but in which BOTH parents have lost some character which their
progenitor possessed, the tendency, whether strong or weak, to reproduce
the lost character might, as was formerly remarked, for all that we
can see to the contrary, be transmitted for almost any number of
generations. When a character which has been lost in a breed, reappears
after a great number of generations, the most probable hypothesis is,
not that one individual suddenly takes after an ancestor removed by
some hundred generations, but that in each successive generation the
character in question has been lying latent, and at last, under unknown
favourable conditions, is developed. With the barb-pigeon, for instance,
which very rarely produces a blue bird, it is probable that there is a
latent tendency in each generation to produce blue plumage. The abstract
improbability of such a tendency being transmitted through a vast number
of generations, is not greater than that of quite useless or rudimentary
organs being similarly transmitted. A mere tendency to produce a
rudiment is indeed sometimes thus inherited.

As all the species of the same genus are supposed to be descended from
a common progenitor, it might be expected that they would occasionally
vary in an analogous manner; so that the varieties of two or more
species would resemble each other, or that a variety of one species
would resemble in certain characters another and distinct species,
this other species being, according to our view, only a well-marked and
permanent variety. But characters exclusively due to analogous variation
would probably be of an unimportant nature, for the preservation of
all functionally important characters will have been determined through
natural selection, in accordance with the different habits of the
species. It might further be expected that the species of the same
genus would occasionally exhibit reversions to long-lost characters.
As, however, we do not know the common ancestor of any natural group,
we cannot distinguish between reversionary and analogous characters.
If, for instance, we did not know that the parent rock-pigeon was not
feather-footed or turn-crowned, we could not have told, whether such
characters in our domestic breeds were reversions or only analogous
variations; but we might have inferred that the blue colour was a case
of reversion from the number of the markings, which are correlated with
this tint, and which would not probably have all appeared together from
simple variation. More especially we might have inferred this from the
blue colour and the several marks so often appearing when differently
coloured breeds are crossed. Hence, although under nature it must
generally be left doubtful, what cases are reversions to formerly
existing characters, and what are new but analogous variations, yet
we ought, on our theory, sometimes to find the varying offspring of a
species assuming characters which are already present in other members
of the same group. And this undoubtedly is the case.

The difficulty in distinguishing variable species is largely due to
the varieties mocking, as it were, other species of the same genus.
A considerable catalogue, also, could be given of forms intermediate
between two other forms, which themselves can only doubtfully be ranked
as species; and this shows, unless all these closely allied forms be
considered as independently created species, that they have in varying
assumed some of the characters of the others. But the best evidence of
analogous variations is afforded by parts or organs which are generally
constant in character, but which occasionally vary so as to resemble,
in some degree, the same part or organ in an allied species. I have
collected a long list of such cases; but here, as before, I lie under
the great disadvantage of not being able to give them. I can only repeat
that such cases certainly occur, and seem to me very remarkable.

I will, however, give one curious and complex case, not indeed as
affecting any important character, but from occurring in several species
of the same genus, partly under domestication and partly under nature.
It is a case almost certainly of reversion. The ass sometimes has very
distinct transverse bars on its legs, like those on the legs of a zebra.
It has been asserted that these are plainest in the foal, and from
inquiries which I have made, I believe this to be true. The stripe on
the shoulder is sometimes double, and is very variable in length and
outline. A white ass, but NOT an albino, has been described without
either spinal or shoulder stripe; and these stripes are sometimes very
obscure, or actually quite lost, in dark-coloured asses. The koulan
of Pallas is said to have been seen with a double shoulder-stripe.
Mr. Blyth has seen a specimen of the hemionus with a distinct
shoulder-stripe, though it properly has none; and I have been informed
by Colonel Poole that foals of this species are generally striped on the
legs and faintly on the shoulder. The quagga, though so plainly barred
like a zebra over the body, is without bars on the legs; but Dr. Gray
has figured one specimen with very distinct zebra-like bars on the
hocks.

With respect to the horse, I have collected cases in England of the
spinal stripe in horses of the most distinct breeds, and of ALL colours;
transverse bars on the legs are not rare in duns, mouse-duns, and in one
instance in a chestnut; a faint shoulder-stripe may sometimes be seen
in duns, and I have seen a trace in a bay horse. My son made a careful
examination and sketch for me of a dun Belgian cart-horse with a double
stripe on each shoulder and with leg-stripes. I have myself seen a dun
Devonshire pony, and a small dun Welsh pony has been carefully described
to me, both with THREE parallel stripes on each shoulder.

In the northwest part of India the Kattywar breed of horses is so
generally striped, that, as I hear from Colonel Poole, who examined
this breed for the Indian Government, a horse without stripes is not
considered as purely bred. The spine is always striped; the legs are
generally barred; and the shoulder-stripe, which is sometimes double
and sometimes treble, is common; the side of the face, moreover, is
sometimes striped. The stripes are often plainest in the foal; and
sometimes quite disappear in old horses. Colonel Poole has seen both
gray and bay Kattywar horses striped when first foaled. I have also
reason to suspect, from information given me by Mr. W.W. Edwards, that
with the English race-horse the spinal stripe is much commoner in the
foal than in the full-grown animal. I have myself recently bred a foal
from a bay mare (offspring of a Turkoman horse and a Flemish mare) by
a bay English race-horse. This foal, when a week old, was marked on its
hinder quarters and on its forehead with numerous very narrow, dark,
zebra-like bars, and its legs were feebly striped. All the stripes soon
disappeared completely. Without here entering on further details I may
state that I have collected cases of leg and shoulder stripes in horses
of very different breeds in various countries from Britain to Eastern
China; and from Norway in the north to the Malay Archipelago in the
south. In all parts of the world these stripes occur far oftenest
in duns and mouse-duns; by the term dun a large range of colour is
included, from one between brown and black to a close approach to cream
colour.

I am aware that Colonel Hamilton Smith, who has written on this subject,
believes that the several breeds of the horse are descended from several
aboriginal species, one of which, the dun, was striped; and that the
above-described appearances are all due to ancient crosses with the dun
stock. But this view may be safely rejected, for it is highly improbable
that the heavy Belgian cart-horse, Welsh ponies, Norwegian cobs, the
lanky Kattywar race, etc., inhabiting the most distant parts of the
world, should have all have been crossed with one supposed aboriginal
stock.

Now let us turn to the effects of crossing the several species of the
horse genus. Rollin asserts that the common mule from the ass and horse
is particularly apt to have bars on its legs; according to Mr. Gosse,
in certain parts of the United States, about nine out of ten mules have
striped legs. I once saw a mule with its legs so much striped that any
one might have thought that it was a hybrid zebra; and Mr. W.C. Martin,
in his excellent treatise on the horse, has given a figure of a similar
mule. In four coloured drawings, which I have seen, of hybrids between
the ass and zebra, the legs were much more plainly barred than the rest
of the body; and in one of them there was a double shoulder-stripe. In
Lord Morton's famous hybrid, from a chestnut mare and male quagga, the
hybrid and even the pure offspring subsequently produced from the same
mare by a black Arabian sire, were much more plainly barred across the
legs than is even the pure quagga. Lastly, and this is another most
remarkable case, a hybrid has been figured by Dr. Gray (and he informs
me that he knows of a second case) from the ass and the hemionus; and
this hybrid, though the ass only occasionally has stripes on his
legs and the hemionus has none and has not even a shoulder-stripe,
nevertheless had all four legs barred, and had three short
shoulder-stripes, like those on the dun Devonshire and Welsh ponies, and
even had some zebra-like stripes on the sides of its face. With respect
to this last fact, I was so convinced that not even a stripe of colour
appears from what is commonly called chance, that I was led solely
from the occurrence of the face-stripes on this hybrid from the ass and
hemionus to ask Colonel Poole whether such face-stripes ever occurred
in the eminently striped Kattywar breed of horses, and was, as we have
seen, answered in the affirmative.

What now are we to say to these several facts? We see several distinct
species of the horse genus becoming, by simple variation, striped on the
legs like a zebra, or striped on the shoulders like an ass. In the horse
we see this tendency strong whenever a dun tint appears--a tint which
approaches to that of the general colouring of the other species of the
genus. The appearance of the stripes is not accompanied by any change
of form, or by any other new character. We see this tendency to become
striped most strongly displayed in hybrids from between several of the
most distinct species. Now observe the case of the several breeds
of pigeons: they are descended from a pigeon (including two or three
sub-species or geographical races) of a bluish colour, with certain bars
and other marks; and when any breed assumes by simple variation a bluish
tint, these bars and other marks invariably reappear; but without any
other change of form or character. When the oldest and truest breeds of
various colours are crossed, we see a strong tendency for the blue tint
and bars and marks to reappear in the mongrels. I have stated that the
most probable hypothesis to account for the reappearance of very ancient
characters, is--that there is a TENDENCY in the young of each successive
generation to produce the long-lost character, and that this tendency,
from unknown causes, sometimes prevails. And we have just seen that in
several species of the horse genus the stripes are either plainer or
appear more commonly in the young than in the old. Call the breeds of
pigeons, some of which have bred true for centuries, species; and how
exactly parallel is the case with that of the species of the horse
genus! For myself, I venture confidently to look back thousands on
thousands of generations, and I see an animal striped like a zebra, but
perhaps otherwise very differently constructed, the common parent of
our domestic horse (whether or not it be descended from one or more wild
stocks) of the ass, the hemionus, quagga, and zebra.

He who believes that each equine species was independently created,
will, I presume, assert that each species has been created with a
tendency to vary, both under nature and under domestication, in this
particular manner, so as often to become striped like the other species
of the genus; and that each has been created with a strong tendency,
when crossed with species inhabiting distant quarters of the world, to
produce hybrids resembling in their stripes, not their own parents, but
other species of the genus. To admit this view is, as it seems to me, to
reject a real for an unreal, or at least for an unknown cause. It makes
the works of God a mere mockery and deception; I would almost as soon
believe with the old and ignorant cosmogonists, that fossil shells had
never lived, but had been created in stone so as to mock the shells now
living on the sea-shore.

SUMMARY.

Our ignorance of the laws of variation is profound. Not in one case out
of a hundred can we pretend to assign any reason why this or that part
has varied. But whenever we have the means of instituting a comparison,
the same laws appear to have acted in producing the lesser differences
between varieties of the same species, and the greater differences
between species of the same genus. Changed conditions generally induce
mere fluctuating variability, but sometimes they cause direct and
definite effects; and these may become strongly marked in the course
of time, though we have not sufficient evidence on this head. Habit in
producing constitutional peculiarities, and use in strengthening, and
disuse in weakening and diminishing organs, appear in many cases to have
been potent in their effects. Homologous parts tend to vary in the same
manner, and homologous parts tend to cohere. Modifications in hard parts
and in external parts sometimes affect softer and internal parts. When
one part is largely developed, perhaps it tends to draw nourishment from
the adjoining parts; and every part of the structure which can be saved
without detriment will be saved. Changes of structure at an early age
may affect parts subsequently developed; and many cases of correlated
variation, the nature of which we are unable to understand, undoubtedly
occur. Multiple parts are variable in number and in structure, perhaps
arising from such parts not having been closely specialised for any
particular function, so that their modifications have not been closely
checked by natural selection. It follows probably from this same cause,
that organic beings low in the scale are more variable than those
standing higher in the scale, and which have their whole organisation
more specialised. Rudimentary organs, from being useless, are not
regulated by natural selection, and hence are variable. Specific
characters--that is, the characters which have come to differ since the
several species of the same genus branched off from a common parent--are
more variable than generic characters, or those which have long been
inherited, and have not differed within this same period. In these
remarks we have referred to special parts or organs being still
variable, because they have recently varied and thus come to differ; but
we have also seen in the second chapter that the same principle applies
to the whole individual; for in a district where many species of a
genus are found--that is, where there has been much former variation and
differentiation, or where the manufactory of new specific forms has been
actively at work--in that district and among these species, we now find,
on an average, most varieties. Secondary sexual characters are highly
variable, and such characters differ much in the species of the same
group. Variability in the same parts of the organisation has generally
been taken advantage of in giving secondary sexual differences to the
two sexes of the same species, and specific differences to the
several species of the same genus. Any part or organ developed to an
extraordinary size or in an extraordinary manner, in comparison with
the same part or organ in the allied species, must have gone through an
extraordinary amount of modification since the genus arose; and thus we
can understand why it should often still be variable in a much higher
degree than other parts; for variation is a long-continued and slow
process, and natural selection will in such cases not as yet have had
time to overcome the tendency to further variability and to
reversion to a less modified state. But when a species with an
extraordinarily developed organ has become the parent of many modified
descendants--which on our view must be a very slow process, requiring a
long lapse of time--in this case, natural selection has succeeded in
giving a fixed character to the organ, in however extraordinary a manner
it may have been developed. Species inheriting nearly the same
constitution from a common parent, and exposed to similar influences,
naturally tend to present analogous variations, or these same species
may occasionally revert to some of the characters of their ancient
progenitors. Although new and important modifications may not arise from
reversion and analogous variation, such modifications will add to the
beautiful and harmonious diversity of nature.

Whatever the cause may be of each slight difference between the
offspring and their parents--and a cause for each must exist--we have
reason to believe that it is the steady accumulation of beneficial
differences which has given rise to all the more important modifications
of structure in relation to the habits of each species.




CHAPTER VI. DIFFICULTIES OF THE THEORY.

 Difficulties of the theory of descent with modification--Absence
 or rarity of transitional varieties--Transitions in habits of
 life--Diversified habits in the same species--Species with habits
 widely different from those of their allies--Organs of extreme
 perfection--Modes of transition--Cases of difficulty--Natura non facit
 saltum--Organs of small importance--Organs not in all cases absolutely
 perfect--The law of Unity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence
 embraced by the theory of Natural Selection.


Long before the reader has arrived at this part of my work, a crowd of
difficulties will have occurred to him. Some of them are so serious that
to this day I can hardly reflect on them without being in some degree
staggered; but, to the best of my judgment, the greater number are only
apparent, and those that are real are not, I think, fatal to the theory.

These difficulties and objections may be classed under the following
heads: First, why, if species have descended from other species by fine
gradations, do we not everywhere see innumerable transitional forms? Why
is not all nature in confusion, instead of the species being, as we see
them, well defined?

Secondly, is it possible that an animal having, for instance,
the structure and habits of a bat, could have been formed by the
modification of some other animal with widely different habits and
structure? Can we believe that natural selection could produce, on
the one hand, an organ of trifling importance, such as the tail of a
giraffe, which serves as a fly-flapper, and, on the other hand, an organ
so wonderful as the eye?

Thirdly, can instincts be acquired and modified through natural
selection? What shall we say to the instinct which leads the bee to make
cells, and which has practically anticipated the discoveries of profound
mathematicians?

Fourthly, how can we account for species, when crossed, being sterile
and producing sterile offspring, whereas, when varieties are crossed,
their fertility is unimpaired?

The two first heads will be here discussed; some miscellaneous
objections in the following chapter; Instinct and Hybridism in the two
succeeding chapters.

ON THE ABSENCE OR RARITY OF TRANSITIONAL VARIETIES.

As natural selection acts solely by the preservation of profitable
modifications, each new form will tend in a fully-stocked country to
take the place of, and finally to exterminate, its own less improved
parent-form and other less-favoured forms with which it comes into
competition. Thus extinction and natural selection go hand in hand.
Hence, if we look at each species as descended from some unknown form,
both the parent and all the transitional varieties will generally have
been exterminated by the very process of the formation and perfection of
the new form.

But, as by this theory innumerable transitional forms must have existed,
why do we not find them embedded in countless numbers in the crust of
the earth? It will be more convenient to discuss this question in the
chapter on the imperfection of the geological record; and I will here
only state that I believe the answer mainly lies in the record being
incomparably less perfect than is generally supposed. The crust of
the earth is a vast museum; but the natural collections have been
imperfectly made, and only at long intervals of time.

But it may be urged that when several closely allied species inhabit
the same territory, we surely ought to find at the present time many
transitional forms. Let us take a simple case: in travelling from north
to south over a continent, we generally meet at successive intervals
with closely allied or representative species, evidently filling nearly
the same place in the natural economy of the land. These representative
species often meet and interlock; and as the one becomes rarer and
rarer, the other becomes more and more frequent, till the one replaces
the other. But if we compare these species where they intermingle, they
are generally as absolutely distinct from each other in every detail of
structure as are specimens taken from the metropolis inhabited by each.
By my theory these allied species are descended from a common parent;
and during the process of modification, each has become adapted to
the conditions of life of its own region, and has supplanted and
exterminated its original parent-form and all the transitional varieties
between its past and present states. Hence we ought not to expect at
the present time to meet with numerous transitional varieties in each
region, though they must have existed there, and may be embedded
there in a fossil condition. But in the intermediate region, having
intermediate conditions of life, why do we not now find closely-linking
intermediate varieties? This difficulty for a long time quite confounded
me. But I think it can be in large part explained.

In the first place we should be extremely cautious in inferring, because
an area is now continuous, that it has been continuous during a long
period. Geology would lead us to believe that most continents have been
broken up into islands even during the later tertiary periods; and in
such islands distinct species might have been separately formed without
the possibility of intermediate varieties existing in the intermediate
zones. By changes in the form of the land and of climate, marine areas
now continuous must often have existed within recent times in a far less
continuous and uniform condition than at present. But I will pass
over this way of escaping from the difficulty; for I believe that many
perfectly defined species have been formed on strictly continuous areas;
though I do not doubt that the formerly broken condition of areas
now continuous, has played an important part in the formation of new
species, more especially with freely-crossing and wandering animals.

In looking at species as they are now distributed over a wide area,
we generally find them tolerably numerous over a large territory, then
becoming somewhat abruptly rarer and rarer on the confines, and finally
disappearing. Hence the neutral territory between two representative
species is generally narrow in comparison with the territory proper to
each. We see the same fact in ascending mountains, and sometimes it
is quite remarkable how abruptly, as Alph. De Candolle has observed, a
common alpine species disappears. The same fact has been noticed by E.
Forbes in sounding the depths of the sea with the dredge. To those who
look at climate and the physical conditions of life as the all-important
elements of distribution, these facts ought to cause surprise, as
climate and height or depth graduate away insensibly. But when we
bear in mind that almost every species, even in its metropolis, would
increase immensely in numbers, were it not for other competing species;
that nearly all either prey on or serve as prey for others; in short,
that each organic being is either directly or indirectly related in the
most important manner to other organic beings--we see that the range
of the inhabitants of any country by no means exclusively depends
on insensibly changing physical conditions, but in large part on
the presence of other species, on which it lives, or by which it is
destroyed, or with which it comes into competition; and as these species
are already defined objects, not blending one into another by insensible
gradations, the range of any one species, depending as it does on the
range of others, will tend to be sharply defined. Moreover, each species
on the confines of its range, where it exists in lessened numbers, will,
during fluctuations in the number of its enemies or of its prey, or in
the nature of the seasons, be extremely liable to utter extermination;
and thus its geographical range will come to be still more sharply
defined.

As allied or representative species, when inhabiting a continuous area,
are generally distributed in such a manner that each has a wide range,
with a comparatively narrow neutral territory between them, in which
they become rather suddenly rarer and rarer; then, as varieties do not
essentially differ from species, the same rule will probably apply to
both; and if we take a varying species inhabiting a very large area,
we shall have to adapt two varieties to two large areas, and a third
variety to a narrow intermediate zone. The intermediate variety,
consequently, will exist in lesser numbers from inhabiting a narrow and
lesser area; and practically, as far as I can make out, this rule holds
good with varieties in a state of nature. I have met with striking
instances of the rule in the case of varieties intermediate between
well-marked varieties in the genus Balanus. And it would appear from
information given me by Mr. Watson, Dr. Asa Gray, and Mr. Wollaston,
that generally, when varieties intermediate between two other forms
occur, they are much rarer numerically than the forms which they
connect. Now, if we may trust these facts and inferences, and conclude
that varieties linking two other varieties together generally have
existed in lesser numbers than the forms which they connect, then we can
understand why intermediate varieties should not endure for very
long periods: why, as a general rule, they should be exterminated and
disappear, sooner than the forms which they originally linked together.

For any form existing in lesser numbers would, as already remarked,
run a greater chance of being exterminated than one existing in large
numbers; and in this particular case the intermediate form would be
eminently liable to the inroads of closely allied forms existing on both
sides of it. But it is a far more important consideration, that during
the process of further modification, by which two varieties are supposed
to be converted and perfected into two distinct species, the two which
exist in larger numbers, from inhabiting larger areas, will have a great
advantage over the intermediate variety, which exists in smaller numbers
in a narrow and intermediate zone. For forms existing in larger numbers
will have a better chance, within any given period, of presenting
further favourable variations for natural selection to seize on, than
will the rarer forms which exist in lesser numbers. Hence, the more
common forms, in the race for life, will tend to beat and supplant the
less common forms, for these will be more slowly modified and improved.
It is the same principle which, as I believe, accounts for the common
species in each country, as shown in the second chapter, presenting on
an average a greater number of well-marked varieties than do the rarer
species. I may illustrate what I mean by supposing three varieties of
sheep to be kept, one adapted to an extensive mountainous region; a
second to a comparatively narrow, hilly tract; and a third to the wide
plains at the base; and that the inhabitants are all trying with equal
steadiness and skill to improve their stocks by selection; the chances
in this case will be strongly in favour of the great holders on the
mountains or on the plains improving their breeds more quickly than the
small holders on the intermediate narrow, hilly tract; and consequently
the improved mountain or plain breed will soon take the place of the
less improved hill breed; and thus the two breeds, which originally
existed in greater numbers, will come into close contact with each
other, without the interposition of the supplanted, intermediate hill
variety.

To sum up, I believe that species come to be tolerably well-defined
objects, and do not at any one period present an inextricable chaos of
varying and intermediate links: first, because new varieties are very
slowly formed, for variation is a slow process, and natural selection
can do nothing until favourable individual differences or variations
occur, and until a place in the natural polity of the country can
be better filled by some modification of some one or more of its
inhabitants. And such new places will depend on slow changes of climate,
or on the occasional immigration of new inhabitants, and, probably, in
a still more important degree, on some of the old inhabitants becoming
slowly modified, with the new forms thus produced and the old ones
acting and reacting on each other. So that, in any one region and at
any one time, we ought to see only a few species presenting slight
modifications of structure in some degree permanent; and this assuredly
we do see.

Secondly, areas now continuous must often have existed within the recent
period as isolated portions, in which many forms, more especially
among the classes which unite for each birth and wander much, may have
separately been rendered sufficiently distinct to rank as representative
species. In this case, intermediate varieties between the several
representative species and their common parent, must formerly have
existed within each isolated portion of the land, but these links
during the process of natural selection will have been supplanted and
exterminated, so that they will no longer be found in a living state.

Thirdly, when two or more varieties have been formed in different
portions of a strictly continuous area, intermediate varieties will, it
is probable, at first have been formed in the intermediate zones, but
they will generally have had a short duration. For these intermediate
varieties will, from reasons already assigned (namely from what we know
of the actual distribution of closely allied or representative species,
and likewise of acknowledged varieties), exist in the intermediate zones
in lesser numbers than the varieties which they tend to connect. From
this cause alone the intermediate varieties will be liable to accidental
extermination; and during the process of further modification through
natural selection, they will almost certainly be beaten and supplanted
by the forms which they connect; for these, from existing in greater
numbers will, in the aggregate, present more varieties, and thus be
further improved through natural selection and gain further advantages.

Lastly, looking not to any one time, but at all time, if my theory be
true, numberless intermediate varieties, linking closely together all
the species of the same group, must assuredly have existed; but the
very process of natural selection constantly tends, as has been so often
remarked, to exterminate the parent forms and the intermediate links.
Consequently evidence of their former existence could be found only
among fossil remains, which are preserved, as we shall attempt to show
in a future chapter, in an extremely imperfect and intermittent record.

ON THE ORIGIN AND TRANSITION OF ORGANIC BEINGS WITH PECULIAR HABITS AND
STRUCTURE.

It has been asked by the opponents of such views as I hold, how, for
instance, could a land carnivorous animal have been converted into one
with aquatic habits; for how could the animal in its transitional
state have subsisted? It would be easy to show that there now exist
carnivorous animals presenting close intermediate grades from strictly
terrestrial to aquatic habits; and as each exists by a struggle for
life, it is clear that each must be well adapted to its place in nature.
Look at the Mustela vison of North America, which has webbed feet,
and which resembles an otter in its fur, short legs, and form of tail;
during summer this animal dives for and preys on fish, but during the
long winter it leaves the frozen waters, and preys, like other polecats
on mice and land animals. If a different case had been taken, and it
had been asked how an insectivorous quadruped could possibly have been
converted into a flying bat, the question would have been far more
difficult to answer. Yet I think such difficulties have little weight.

Here, as on other occasions, I lie under a heavy disadvantage, for, out
of the many striking cases which I have collected, I can give only
one or two instances of transitional habits and structures in allied
species; and of diversified habits, either constant or occasional, in
the same species. And it seems to me that nothing less than a long list
of such cases is sufficient to lessen the difficulty in any particular
case like that of the bat.

Look at the family of squirrels; here we have the finest gradation from
animals with their tails only slightly flattened, and from others, as
Sir J. Richardson has remarked, with the posterior part of their bodies
rather wide and with the skin on their flanks rather full, to the
so-called flying squirrels; and flying squirrels have their limbs and
even the base of the tail united by a broad expanse of skin, which
serves as a parachute and allows them to glide through the air to
an astonishing distance from tree to tree. We cannot doubt that each
structure is of use to each kind of squirrel in its own country, by
enabling it to escape birds or beasts of prey, or to collect food more
quickly, or, as there is reason to believe, to lessen the danger
from occasional falls. But it does not follow from this fact that the
structure of each squirrel is the best that it is possible to conceive
under all possible conditions. Let the climate and vegetation change,
let other competing rodents or new beasts of prey immigrate, or old ones
become modified, and all analogy would lead us to believe that some,
at least, of the squirrels would decrease in numbers or become
exterminated, unless they also become modified and improved in structure
in a corresponding manner. Therefore, I can see no difficulty,
more especially under changing conditions of life, in the continued
preservation of individuals with fuller and fuller flank-membranes,
each modification being useful, each being propagated, until, by the
accumulated effects of this process of natural selection, a perfect
so-called flying squirrel was produced.

Now look at the Galeopithecus or so-called flying lemur, which was
formerly ranked among bats, but is now believed to belong to the
Insectivora. An extremely wide flank-membrane stretches from the corners
of the jaw to the tail, and includes the limbs with the elongated
fingers. This flank-membrane is furnished with an extensor muscle.
Although no graduated links of structure, fitted for gliding through the
air, now connect the Galeopithecus with the other Insectivora, yet there
is no difficulty in supposing that such links formerly existed, and that
each was developed in the same manner as with the less perfectly gliding
squirrels; each grade of structure having been useful to its possessor.
Nor can I see any insuperable difficulty in further believing it
possible that the membrane-connected fingers and fore-arm of the
Galeopithecus might have been greatly lengthened by natural selection;
and this, as far as the organs of flight are concerned, would
have converted the animal into a bat. In certain bats in which the
wing-membrane extends from the top of the shoulder to the tail and
includes the hind-legs, we perhaps see traces of an apparatus originally
fitted for gliding through the air rather than for flight.

If about a dozen genera of birds were to become extinct, who would have
ventured to surmise that birds might have existed which used their wings
solely as flappers, like the logger headed duck (Micropterus of Eyton);
as fins in the water and as front legs on the land, like the penguin;
as sails, like the ostrich; and functionally for no purpose, like the
apteryx? Yet the structure of each of these birds is good for it, under
the conditions of life to which it is exposed, for each has to live by a
struggle: but it is not necessarily the best possible under all possible
conditions. It must not be inferred from these remarks that any of the
grades of wing-structure here alluded to, which perhaps may all be the
result of disuse, indicate the steps by which birds actually acquired
their perfect power of flight; but they serve to show what diversified
means of transition are at least possible.

Seeing that a few members of such water-breathing classes as the
Crustacea and Mollusca are adapted to live on the land; and seeing that
we have flying birds and mammals, flying insects of the most diversified
types, and formerly had flying reptiles, it is conceivable that
flying-fish, which now glide far through the air, slightly rising and
turning by the aid of their fluttering fins, might have been modified
into perfectly winged animals. If this had been effected, who would
have ever imagined that in an early transitional state they had been
inhabitants of the open ocean, and had used their incipient organs of
flight exclusively, so far as we know, to escape being devoured by other
fish?

When we see any structure highly perfected for any particular habit,
as the wings of a bird for flight, we should bear in mind that animals
displaying early transitional grades of the structure will seldom have
survived to the present day, for they will have been supplanted by their
successors, which were gradually rendered more perfect through natural
selection. Furthermore, we may conclude that transitional states between
structures fitted for very different habits of life will rarely have
been developed at an early period in great numbers and under many
subordinate forms. Thus, to return to our imaginary illustration of
the flying-fish, it does not seem probable that fishes capable of true
flight would have been developed under many subordinate forms, for
taking prey of many kinds in many ways, on the land and in the water,
until their organs of flight had come to a high stage of perfection,
so as to have given them a decided advantage over other animals in
the battle for life. Hence the chance of discovering species with
transitional grades of structure in a fossil condition will always be
less, from their having existed in lesser numbers, than in the case of
species with fully developed structures.

I will now give two or three instances, both of diversified and of
changed habits, in the individuals of the same species. In either case
it would be easy for natural selection to adapt the structure of the
animal to its changed habits, or exclusively to one of its several
habits. It is, however, difficult to decide and immaterial for us,
whether habits generally change first and structure afterwards; or
whether slight modifications of structure lead to changed habits; both
probably often occurring almost simultaneously. Of cases of changed
habits it will suffice merely to allude to that of the many British
insects which now feed on exotic plants, or exclusively on artificial
substances. Of diversified habits innumerable instances could be given:
I have often watched a tyrant flycatcher (Saurophagus sulphuratus) in
South America, hovering over one spot and then proceeding to another,
like a kestrel, and at other times standing stationary on the margin of
water, and then dashing into it like a kingfisher at a fish. In our own
country the larger titmouse (Parus major) may be seen climbing branches,
almost like a creeper; it sometimes, like a shrike, kills small birds by
blows on the head; and I have many times seen and heard it hammering the
seeds of the yew on a branch, and thus breaking them like a nuthatch. In
North America the black bear was seen by Hearne swimming for hours with
widely open mouth, thus catching, almost like a whale, insects in the
water.

As we sometimes see individuals following habits different from those
proper to their species and to the other species of the same genus, we
might expect that such individuals would occasionally give rise to
new species, having anomalous habits, and with their structure either
slightly or considerably modified from that of their type. And such
instances occur in nature. Can a more striking instance of adaptation be
given than that of a woodpecker for climbing trees and seizing insects
in the chinks of the bark? Yet in North America there are woodpeckers
which feed largely on fruit, and others with elongated wings which chase
insects on the wing. On the plains of La Plata, where hardly a tree
grows, there is a woodpecker (Colaptes campestris) which has two toes
before and two behind, a long-pointed tongue, pointed tail-feathers,
sufficiently stiff to support the bird in a vertical position on a post,
but not so stiff as in the typical wood-peckers, and a straight, strong
beak. The beak, however, is not so straight or so strong as in the
typical woodpeckers but it is strong enough to bore into wood. Hence
this Colaptes, in all the essential parts of its structure, is a
woodpecker. Even in such trifling characters as the colouring, the harsh
tone of the voice, and undulatory flight, its close blood-relationship
to our common woodpecker is plainly declared; yet, as I can assert, not
only from my own observations, but from those of the accurate Azara, in
certain large districts it does not climb trees, and it makes its
nest in holes in banks! In certain other districts, however, this same
woodpecker, as Mr. Hudson states, frequents trees, and bores holes in
the trunk for its nest. I may mention as another illustration of the
varied habits of this genus, that a Mexican Colaptes has been described
by De Saussure as boring holes into hard wood in order to lay up a store
of acorns.

Petrels are the most aerial and oceanic of birds, but, in the quiet
sounds of Tierra del Fuego, the Puffinuria berardi, in its general
habits, in its astonishing power of diving, in its manner of swimming
and of flying when made to take flight, would be mistaken by any one for
an auk or a grebe; nevertheless, it is essentially a petrel, but with
many parts of its organisation profoundly modified in relation to its
new habits of life; whereas the woodpecker of La Plata has had its
structure only slightly modified. In the case of the water-ouzel, the
acutest observer, by examining its dead body, would never have suspected
its sub-aquatic habits; yet this bird, which is allied to the thrush
family, subsists by diving,--using its wings under water and
grasping stones with its feet. All the members of the great order of
Hymenopterous insects are terrestrial, excepting the genus Proctotrupes,
which Sir John Lubbock has discovered to be aquatic in its habits; it
often enters the water and dives about by the use not of its legs but of
its wings, and remains as long as four hours beneath the surface; yet
it exhibits no modification in structure in accordance with its abnormal
habits.

He who believes that each being has been created as we now see it, must
occasionally have felt surprise when he has met with an animal having
habits and structure not in agreement. What can be plainer than that the
webbed feet of ducks and geese are formed for swimming? Yet there are
upland geese with webbed feet which rarely go near the water; and no one
except Audubon, has seen the frigate-bird, which has all its four toes
webbed, alight on the surface of the ocean. On the other hand, grebes
and coots are eminently aquatic, although their toes are only bordered
by membrane. What seems plainer than that the long toes, not furnished
with membrane, of the Grallatores, are formed for walking over swamps
and floating plants. The water-hen and landrail are members of this
order, yet the first is nearly as aquatic as the coot, and the second is
nearly as terrestrial as the quail or partridge. In such cases, and
many others could be given, habits have changed without a corresponding
change of structure. The webbed feet of the upland goose may be said to
have become almost rudimentary in function, though not in structure.
In the frigate-bird, the deeply scooped membrane between the toes shows
that structure has begun to change.

He who believes in separate and innumerable acts of creation may say,
that in these cases it has pleased the Creator to cause a being of one
type to take the place of one belonging to another type; but this seems
to me only restating the fact in dignified language. He who believes in
the struggle for existence and in the principle of natural selection,
will acknowledge that every organic being is constantly endeavouring to
increase in numbers; and that if any one being varies ever so little,
either in habits or structure, and thus gains an advantage over some
other inhabitant of the same country, it will seize on the place of that
inhabitant, however different that may be from its own place. Hence it
will cause him no surprise that there should be geese and frigate-birds
with webbed feet, living on the dry land and rarely alighting on the
water, that there should be long-toed corncrakes, living in meadows
instead of in swamps; that there should be woodpeckers where hardly a
tree grows; that there should be diving thrushes and diving Hymenoptera,
and petrels with the habits of auks.

ORGANS OF EXTREME PERFECTION AND COMPLICATION.

To suppose that the eye with all its inimitable contrivances for
adjusting the focus to different distances, for admitting different
amounts of light, and for the correction of spherical and chromatic
aberration, could have been formed by natural selection, seems, I freely
confess, absurd in the highest degree. When it was first said that the
sun stood still and the world turned round, the common sense of mankind
declared the doctrine false; but the old saying of Vox populi, vox Dei,
as every philosopher knows, cannot be trusted in science. Reason tells
me, that if numerous gradations from a simple and imperfect eye to one
complex and perfect can be shown to exist, each grade being useful to
its possessor, as is certainly the case; if further, the eye ever varies
and the variations be inherited, as is likewise certainly the case;
and if such variations should be useful to any animal under changing
conditions of life, then the difficulty of believing that a perfect and
complex eye could be formed by natural selection, though insuperable by
our imagination, should not be considered as subversive of the theory.
How a nerve comes to be sensitive to light, hardly concerns us more than
how life itself originated; but I may remark that, as some of the lowest
organisms in which nerves cannot be detected, are capable of perceiving
light, it does not seem impossible that certain sensitive elements
in their sarcode should become aggregated and developed into nerves,
endowed with this special sensibility.

In searching for the gradations through which an organ in any species
has been perfected, we ought to look exclusively to its lineal
progenitors; but this is scarcely ever possible, and we are forced
to look to other species and genera of the same group, that is to the
collateral descendants from the same parent-form, in order to see what
gradations are possible, and for the chance of some gradations having
been transmitted in an unaltered or little altered condition. But the
state of the same organ in distinct classes may incidentally throw light
on the steps by which it has been perfected.

The simplest organ which can be called an eye consists of an optic
nerve, surrounded by pigment-cells and covered by translucent skin, but
without any lens or other refractive body. We may, however, according
to M. Jourdain, descend even a step lower and find aggregates of
pigment-cells, apparently serving as organs of vision, without any
nerves, and resting merely on sarcodic tissue. Eyes of the above simple
nature are not capable of distinct vision, and serve only to distinguish
light from darkness. In certain star-fishes, small depressions in the
layer of pigment which surrounds the nerve are filled, as described by
the author just quoted, with transparent gelatinous matter, projecting
with a convex surface, like the cornea in the higher animals. He
suggests that this serves not to form an image, but only to concentrate
the luminous rays and render their perception more easy. In this
concentration of the rays we gain the first and by far the most
important step towards the formation of a true, picture-forming eye; for
we have only to place the naked extremity of the optic nerve, which in
some of the lower animals lies deeply buried in the body, and in
some near the surface, at the right distance from the concentrating
apparatus, and an image will be formed on it.

In the great class of the Articulata, we may start from an optic nerve
simply coated with pigment, the latter sometimes forming a sort of
pupil, but destitute of lens or other optical contrivance. With insects
it is now known that the numerous facets on the cornea of their great
compound eyes form true lenses, and that the cones include curiously
modified nervous filaments. But these organs in the Articulata are so
much diversified that Muller formerly made three main classes with seven
subdivisions, besides a fourth main class of aggregated simple eyes.

When we reflect on these facts, here given much too briefly, with
respect to the wide, diversified, and graduated range of structure in
the eyes of the lower animals; and when we bear in mind how small the
number of all living forms must be in comparison with those which have
become extinct, the difficulty ceases to be very great in believing that
natural selection may have converted the simple apparatus of an optic
nerve, coated with pigment and invested by transparent membrane, into
an optical instrument as perfect as is possessed by any member of the
Articulata class.

He who will go thus far, ought not to hesitate to go one step further,
if he finds on finishing this volume that large bodies of facts,
otherwise inexplicable, can be explained by the theory of modification
through natural selection; he ought to admit that a structure even as
perfect as an eagle's eye might thus be formed, although in this case
he does not know the transitional states. It has been objected that in
order to modify the eye and still preserve it as a perfect instrument,
many changes would have to be effected simultaneously, which, it is
assumed, could not be done through natural selection; but as I have
attempted to show in my work on the variation of domestic animals, it is
not necessary to suppose that the modifications were all simultaneous,
if they were extremely slight and gradual. Different kinds of
modification would, also, serve for the same general purpose: as Mr.
Wallace has remarked, "If a lens has too short or too long a focus, it
may be amended either by an alteration of curvature, or an alteration of
density; if the curvature be irregular, and the rays do not converge
to a point, then any increased regularity of curvature will be an
improvement. So the contraction of the iris and the muscular
movements of the eye are neither of them essential to vision, but only
improvements which might have been added and perfected at any stage of
the construction of the instrument." Within the highest division of
the animal kingdom, namely, the Vertebrata, we can start from an eye
so simple, that it consists, as in the lancelet, of a little sack of
transparent skin, furnished with a nerve and lined with pigment, but
destitute of any other apparatus. In fishes and reptiles, as Owen has
remarked, "The range of gradation of dioptric structures is very
great." It is a significant fact that even in man, according to the high
authority of Virchow, the beautiful crystalline lens is formed in the
embryo by an accumulation of epidermic cells, lying in a sack-like fold
of the skin; and the vitreous body is formed from embryonic subcutaneous
tissue. To arrive, however, at a just conclusion regarding the
formation of the eye, with all its marvellous yet not absolutely perfect
characters, it is indispensable that the reason should conquer the
imagination; but I have felt the difficulty far to keenly to be
surprised at others hesitating to extend the principle of natural
selection to so startling a length.

It is scarcely possible to avoid comparing the eye with a telescope.
We know that this instrument has been perfected by the long-continued
efforts of the highest human intellects; and we naturally infer that the
eye has been formed by a somewhat analogous process. But may not this
inference be presumptuous? Have we any right to assume that the Creator
works by intellectual powers like those of man? If we must compare the
eye to an optical instrument, we ought in imagination to take a thick
layer of transparent tissue, with spaces filled with fluid, and with a
nerve sensitive to light beneath, and then suppose every part of this
layer to be continually changing slowly in density, so as to separate
into layers of different densities and thicknesses, placed at different
distances from each other, and with the surfaces of each layer slowly
changing in form. Further we must suppose that there is a power,
represented by natural selection or the survival of the fittest, always
intently watching each slight alteration in the transparent layers; and
carefully preserving each which, under varied circumstances, in any way
or degree, tends to produce a distincter image. We must suppose each
new state of the instrument to be multiplied by the million; each to be
preserved until a better is produced, and then the old ones to be all
destroyed. In living bodies, variation will cause the slight alteration,
generation will multiply them almost infinitely, and natural selection
will pick out with unerring skill each improvement. Let this process
go on for millions of years; and during each year on millions of
individuals of many kinds; and may we not believe that a living optical
instrument might thus be formed as superior to one of glass, as the
works of the Creator are to those of man?

MODES Of TRANSITION.

If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed, which
could not possibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight
modifications, my theory would absolutely break down. But I can find
out no such case. No doubt many organs exist of which we do not know
the transitional grades, more especially if we look to much-isolated
species, around which, according to the theory, there has been much
extinction. Or again, if we take an organ common to all the members of
a class, for in this latter case the organ must have been originally
formed at a remote period, since which all the many members of the class
have been developed; and in order to discover the early transitional
grades through which the organ has passed, we should have to look to
very ancient ancestral forms, long since become extinct.

We should be extremely cautious in concluding that an organ could not
have been formed by transitional gradations of some kind. Numerous cases
could be given among the lower animals of the same organ performing
at the same time wholly distinct functions; thus in the larva of the
dragon-fly and in the fish Cobites the alimentary canal respires,
digests, and excretes. In the Hydra, the animal may be turned inside
out, and the exterior surface will then digest and the stomach respire.
In such cases natural selection might specialise, if any advantage
were thus gained, the whole or part of an organ, which had previously
performed two functions, for one function alone, and thus by insensible
steps greatly change its nature. Many plants are known which regularly
produce at the same time differently constructed flowers; and if such
plants were to produce one kind alone, a great change would be effected
with comparative suddenness in the character of the species. It is,
however, probable that the two sorts of flowers borne by the same plant
were originally differentiated by finely graduated steps, which may
still be followed in some few cases.

Again, two distinct organs, or the same organ under two very different
forms, may simultaneously perform in the same individual the same
function, and this is an extremely important means of transition: to
give one instance--there are fish with gills or branchiae that breathe
the air dissolved in the water, at the same time that they breathe free
air in their swim-bladders, this latter organ being divided by highly
vascular partitions and having a ductus pneumaticus for the supply of
air. To give another instance from the vegetable kingdom: plants climb
by three distinct means, by spirally twining, by clasping a support with
their sensitive tendrils, and by the emission of aerial rootlets; these
three means are usually found in distinct groups, but some few species
exhibit two of the means, or even all three, combined in the same
individual. In all such cases one of the two organs might readily be
modified and perfected so as to perform all the work, being aided during
the progress of modification by the other organ; and then this other
organ might be modified for some other and quite distinct purpose, or be
wholly obliterated.

The illustration of the swim-bladder in fishes is a good one, because
it shows us clearly the highly important fact that an organ originally
constructed for one purpose, namely flotation, may be converted into
one for a widely different purpose, namely respiration. The swim-bladder
has, also, been worked in as an accessory to the auditory organs
of certain fishes. All physiologists admit that the swim-bladder is
homologous, or "ideally similar" in position and structure with the
lungs of the higher vertebrate animals: hence there is no reason to
doubt that the swim-bladder has actually been converted into lungs, or
an organ used exclusively for respiration.

According to this view it may be inferred that all vertebrate animals
with true lungs are descended by ordinary generation from an ancient
and unknown prototype which was furnished with a floating apparatus or
swim-bladder. We can thus, as I infer from Professor Owen's interesting
description of these parts, understand the strange fact that every
particle of food and drink which we swallow has to pass over the
orifice of the trachea, with some risk of falling into the lungs,
notwithstanding the beautiful contrivance by which the glottis
is closed. In the higher Vertebrata the branchiae have wholly
disappeared--but in the embryo the slits on the sides of the neck and
the loop-like course of the arteries still mark their former position.
But it is conceivable that the now utterly lost branchiae might have
been gradually worked in by natural selection for some distinct purpose:
for instance, Landois has shown that the wings of insects are developed
from the trachea; it is therefore highly probable that in this great
class organs which once served for respiration have been actually
converted into organs for flight.

In considering transitions of organs, it is so important to bear in mind
the probability of conversion from one function to another, that I will
give another instance. Pedunculated cirripedes have two minute folds of
skin, called by me the ovigerous frena, which serve, through the means
of a sticky secretion, to retain the eggs until they are hatched within
the sack. These cirripedes have no branchiae, the whole surface of
the body and of the sack, together with the small frena, serving for
respiration. The Balanidae or sessile cirripedes, on the other hand,
have no ovigerous frena, the eggs lying loose at the bottom of the sack,
within the well-enclosed shell; but they have, in the same relative
position with the frena, large, much-folded membranes, which freely
communicate with the circulatory lacunae of the sack and body, and which
have been considered by all naturalists to act as branchiae. Now I
think no one will dispute that the ovigerous frena in the one family are
strictly homologous with the branchiae of the other family; indeed, they
graduate into each other. Therefore it need not be doubted that the two
little folds of skin, which originally served as ovigerous frena, but
which, likewise, very slightly aided in the act of respiration, have
been gradually converted by natural selection into branchiae, simply
through an increase in their size and the obliteration of their adhesive
glands. If all pedunculated cirripedes had become extinct, and they have
suffered far more extinction than have sessile cirripedes, who would
ever have imagined that the branchiae in this latter family had
originally existed as organs for preventing the ova from being washed
out of the sack?

There is another possible mode of transition, namely, through the
acceleration or retardation of the period of reproduction. This has
lately been insisted on by Professor Cope and others in the United
States. It is now known that some animals are capable of reproduction
at a very early age, before they have acquired their perfect characters;
and if this power became thoroughly well developed in a species, it
seems probable that the adult stage of development would sooner or later
be lost; and in this case, especially if the larva differed much from
the mature form, the character of the species would be greatly changed
and degraded. Again, not a few animals, after arriving at maturity, go
on changing in character during nearly their whole lives. With mammals,
for instance, the form of the skull is often much altered with age, of
which Dr. Murie has given some striking instances with seals. Every
one knows how the horns of stags become more and more branched, and the
plumes of some birds become more finely developed, as they grow older.
Professor Cope states that the teeth of certain lizards change much in
shape with advancing years. With crustaceans not only many trivial,
but some important parts assume a new character, as recorded by Fritz
Muller, after maturity. In all such cases--and many could be given--if
the age for reproduction were retarded, the character of the species, at
least in its adult state, would be modified; nor is it improbable that
the previous and earlier stages of development would in some cases be
hurried through and finally lost. Whether species have often or ever
been modified through this comparatively sudden mode of transition, I
can form no opinion; but if this has occurred, it is probable that the
differences between the young and the mature, and between the mature and
the old, were primordially acquired by graduated steps.

SPECIAL DIFFICULTIES OF THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION.

Although we must be extremely cautious in concluding that any organ
could not have been produced by successive, small, transitional
gradations, yet undoubtedly serious cases of difficulty occur.

One of the most serious is that of neuter insects, which are often
differently constructed from either the males or fertile females; but
this case will be treated of in the next chapter. The electric organs of
fishes offer another case of special difficulty; for it is impossible
to conceive by what steps these wondrous organs have been produced. But
this is not surprising, for we do not even know of what use they are.
In the gymnotus and torpedo they no doubt serve as powerful means of
defence, and perhaps for securing prey; yet in the ray, as observed
by Matteucci, an analogous organ in the tail manifests but little
electricity, even when the animal is greatly irritated; so little that
it can hardly be of any use for the above purposes. Moreover, in the
ray, besides the organ just referred to, there is, as Dr. R. McDonnell
has shown, another organ near the head, not known to be electrical, but
which appears to be the real homologue of the electric battery in the
torpedo. It is generally admitted that there exists between these organs
and ordinary muscle a close analogy, in intimate structure, in the
distribution of the nerves, and in the manner in which they are acted
on by various reagents. It should, also, be especially observed that
muscular contraction is accompanied by an electrical discharge; and,
as Dr. Radcliffe insists, "in the electrical apparatus of the torpedo
during rest, there would seem to be a charge in every respect like that
which is met with in muscle and nerve during the rest, and the discharge
of the torpedo, instead of being peculiar, may be only another form of
the discharge which attends upon the action of muscle and motor nerve."
Beyond this we cannot at present go in the way of explanation; but as
we know so little about the uses of these organs, and as we know nothing
about the habits and structure of the progenitors of the existing
electric fishes, it would be extremely bold to maintain that no
serviceable transitions are possible by which these organs might have
been gradually developed.

These organs appear at first to offer another and far more serious
difficulty; for they occur in about a dozen kinds of fish, of which
several are widely remote in their affinities. When the same organ is
found in several members of the same class, especially if in members
having very different habits of life, we may generally attribute its
presence to inheritance from a common ancestor; and its absence in some
of the members to loss through disuse or natural selection. So that, if
the electric organs had been inherited from some one ancient progenitor,
we might have expected that all electric fishes would have been
specially related to each other; but this is far from the case. Nor does
geology at all lead to the belief that most fishes formerly possessed
electric organs, which their modified descendants have now lost. But
when we look at the subject more closely, we find in the several fishes
provided with electric organs, that these are situated in different
parts of the body, that they differ in construction, as in the
arrangement of the plates, and, according to Pacini, in the process or
means by which the electricity is excited--and lastly, in being supplied
with nerves proceeding from different sources, and this is perhaps
the most important of all the differences. Hence in the several
fishes furnished with electric organs, these cannot be considered as
homologous, but only as analogous in function. Consequently there is
no reason to suppose that they have been inherited from a common
progenitor; for had this been the case they would have closely resembled
each other in all respects. Thus the difficulty of an organ, apparently
the same, arising in several remotely allied species, disappears,
leaving only the lesser yet still great difficulty: namely, by what
graduated steps these organs have been developed in each separate group
of fishes.

The luminous organs which occur in a few insects, belonging to widely
different families, and which are situated in different parts of the
body, offer, under our present state of ignorance, a difficulty almost
exactly parallel with that of the electric organs. Other similar cases
could be given; for instance in plants, the very curious contrivance of
a mass of pollen-grains, borne on a foot-stalk with an adhesive gland,
is apparently the same in Orchis and Asclepias, genera almost as remote
as is possible among flowering plants; but here again the parts are not
homologous. In all cases of beings, far removed from each other in the
scale of organisation, which are furnished with similar and peculiar
organs, it will be found that although the general appearance and
function of the organs may be the same, yet fundamental differences
between them can always be detected. For instance, the eyes of
Cephalopods or cuttle-fish and of vertebrate animals appear wonderfully
alike; and in such widely sundered groups no part of this resemblance
can be due to inheritance from a common progenitor. Mr. Mivart has
advanced this case as one of special difficulty, but I am unable to
see the force of his argument. An organ for vision must be formed of
transparent tissue, and must include some sort of lens for throwing
an image at the back of a darkened chamber. Beyond this superficial
resemblance, there is hardly any real similarity between the eyes of
cuttle-fish and vertebrates, as may be seen by consulting Hensen's
admirable memoir on these organs in the Cephalopoda. It is impossible
for me here to enter on details, but I may specify a few of the points
of difference. The crystalline lens in the higher cuttle-fish consists
of two parts, placed one behind the other like two lenses, both having
a very different structure and disposition to what occurs in the
vertebrata. The retina is wholly different, with an actual inversion of
the elemental parts, and with a large nervous ganglion included within
the membranes of the eye. The relations of the muscles are as different
as it is possible to conceive, and so in other points. Hence it is not
a little difficult to decide how far even the same terms ought to be
employed in describing the eyes of the Cephalopoda and Vertebrata. It
is, of course, open to any one to deny that the eye in either case could
have been developed through the natural selection of successive slight
variations; but if this be admitted in the one case it is clearly
possible in the other; and fundamental differences of structure in the
visual organs of two groups might have been anticipated, in accordance
with this view of their manner of formation. As two men have sometimes
independently hit on the same invention, so in the several foregoing
cases it appears that natural selection, working for the good of each
being, and taking advantage of all favourable variations, has produced
similar organs, as far as function is concerned, in distinct organic
beings, which owe none of their structure in common to inheritance from
a common progenitor.

Fritz Muller, in order to test the conclusions arrived at in this
volume, has followed out with much care a nearly similar line of
argument. Several families of crustaceans include a few species,
possessing an air-breathing apparatus and fitted to live out of the
water. In two of these families, which were more especially examined by
Muller, and which are nearly related to each other, the species agree
most closely in all important characters: namely in their sense organs,
circulating systems, in the position of the tufts of hair within
their complex stomachs, and lastly in the whole structure of the
water-breathing branchiae, even to the microscopical hooks by which they
are cleansed. Hence it might have been expected that in the few species
belonging to both families which live on the land, the equally important
air-breathing apparatus would have been the same; for why should this
one apparatus, given for the same purpose, have been made to differ,
while all the other important organs were closely similar, or rather,
identical.

Fritz Muller argues that this close similarity in so many points
of structure must, in accordance with the views advanced by me, be
accounted for by inheritance from a common progenitor. But as the vast
majority of the species in the above two families, as well as most
other crustaceans, are aquatic in their habits, it is improbable in the
highest degree that their common progenitor should have been adapted for
breathing air. Muller was thus led carefully to examine the apparatus in
the air-breathing species; and he found it to differ in each in several
important points, as in the position of the orifices, in the manner in
which they are opened and closed, and in some accessory details. Now
such differences are intelligible, and might even have been expected, on
the supposition that species belonging to distinct families had slowly
become adapted to live more and more out of water, and to breathe the
air. For these species, from belonging to distinct families, would have
differed to a certain extent, and in accordance with the principle that
the nature of each variation depends on two factors, viz., the nature of
the organism and that of the surrounding conditions, their variability
assuredly would not have been exactly the same. Consequently natural
selection would have had different materials or variations to work on,
in order to arrive at the same functional result; and the structures
thus acquired would almost necessarily have differed. On the hypothesis
of separate acts of creation the whole case remains unintelligible. This
line of argument seems to have had great weight in leading Fritz Muller
to accept the views maintained by me in this volume.

Another distinguished zoologist, the late Professor Claparede, has
argued in the same manner, and has arrived at the same result. He
shows that there are parasitic mites (Acaridae), belonging to distinct
sub-families and families, which are furnished with hair-claspers. These
organs must have been independently developed, as they could not have
been inherited from a common progenitor; and in the several groups they
are formed by the modification of the fore legs, of the hind legs, of
the maxillae or lips, and of appendages on the under side of the hind
part of the body.

In the foregoing cases, we see the same end gained and the same function
performed, in beings not at all or only remotely allied, by organs in
appearance, though not in development, closely similar. On the other
hand, it is a common rule throughout nature that the same end should
be gained, even sometimes in the case of closely related beings, by the
most diversified means. How differently constructed is the feathered
wing of a bird and the membrane-covered wing of a bat; and still more so
the four wings of a butterfly, the two wings of a fly, and the two wings
with the elytra of a beetle. Bivalve shells are made to open and shut,
but on what a number of patterns is the hinge constructed, from the long
row of neatly interlocking teeth in a Nucula to the simple ligament of
a Mussel! Seeds are disseminated by their minuteness, by their capsule
being converted into a light balloon-like envelope, by being embedded
in pulp or flesh, formed of the most diverse parts, and rendered
nutritious, as well as conspicuously coloured, so as to attract and
be devoured by birds, by having hooks and grapnels of many kinds and
serrated awns, so as to adhere to the fur of quadrupeds, and by being
furnished with wings and plumes, as different in shape as they are
elegant in structure, so as to be wafted by every breeze. I will give
one other instance: for this subject of the same end being gained by the
most diversified means well deserves attention. Some authors maintain
that organic beings have been formed in many ways for the sake of
mere variety, almost like toys in a shop, but such a view of nature is
incredible. With plants having separated sexes, and with those in which,
though hermaphrodites, the pollen does not spontaneously fall on the
stigma, some aid is necessary for their fertilisation. With several
kinds this is effected by the pollen-grains, which are light and
incoherent, being blown by the wind through mere chance on to the
stigma; and this is the simplest plan which can well be conceived. An
almost equally simple, though very different plan occurs in many plants
in which a symmetrical flower secretes a few drops of nectar, and is
consequently visited by insects; and these carry the pollen from the
anthers to the stigma.

From this simple stage we may pass through an inexhaustible number of
contrivances, all for the same purpose and effected in essentially the
same manner, but entailing changes in every part of the flower. The
nectar may be stored in variously shaped receptacles, with the
stamens and pistils modified in many ways, sometimes forming trap-like
contrivances, and sometimes capable of neatly adapted movements through
irritability or elasticity. From such structures we may advance till we
come to such a case of extraordinary adaptation as that lately described
by Dr. Cruger in the Coryanthes. This orchid has part of its labellum or
lower lip hollowed out into a great bucket, into which drops of almost
pure water continually fall from two secreting horns which stand above
it; and when the bucket is half-full, the water overflows by a spout on
one side. The basal part of the labellum stands over the bucket, and is
itself hollowed out into a sort of chamber with two lateral entrances;
within this chamber there are curious fleshy ridges. The most ingenious
man, if he had not witnessed what takes place, could never have imagined
what purpose all these parts serve. But Dr. Cruger saw crowds of large
humble-bees visiting the gigantic flowers of this orchid, not in order
to suck nectar, but to gnaw off the ridges within the chamber above the
bucket; in doing this they frequently pushed each other into the bucket,
and their wings being thus wetted they could not fly away, but were
compelled to crawl out through the passage formed by the spout or
overflow. Dr. Cruger saw a "continual procession" of bees thus crawling
out of their involuntary bath. The passage is narrow, and is roofed over
by the column, so that a bee, in forcing its way out, first rubs its
back against the viscid stigma and then against the viscid glands of the
pollen-masses. The pollen-masses are thus glued to the back of the
bee which first happens to crawl out through the passage of a lately
expanded flower, and are thus carried away. Dr. Cruger sent me a flower
in spirits of wine, with a bee which he had killed before it had quite
crawled out, with a pollen-mass still fastened to its back. When the
bee, thus provided, flies to another flower, or to the same flower a
second time, and is pushed by its comrades into the bucket and then
crawls out by the passage, the pollen-mass necessarily comes first into
contact with the viscid stigma, and adheres to it, and the flower is
fertilised. Now at last we see the full use of every part of the flower,
of the water-secreting horns of the bucket half-full of water, which
prevents the bees from flying away, and forces them to crawl out through
the spout, and rub against the properly placed viscid pollen-masses and
the viscid stigma.

The construction of the flower in another closely allied orchid, namely,
the Catasetum, is widely different, though serving the same end; and is
equally curious. Bees visit these flowers, like those of the Coryanthes,
in order to gnaw the labellum; in doing this they inevitably touch
a long, tapering, sensitive projection, or, as I have called it, the
antenna. This antenna, when touched, transmits a sensation or vibration
to a certain membrane which is instantly ruptured; this sets free a
spring by which the pollen-mass is shot forth, like an arrow, in the
right direction, and adheres by its viscid extremity to the back of the
bee. The pollen-mass of the male plant (for the sexes are separate in
this orchid) is thus carried to the flower of the female plant, where it
is brought into contact with the stigma, which is viscid enough to
break certain elastic threads, and retain the pollen, thus effecting
fertilisation.

How, it may be asked, in the foregoing and in innumerable other
instances, can we understand the graduated scale of complexity and the
multifarious means for gaining the same end. The answer no doubt is, as
already remarked, that when two forms vary, which already differ from
each other in some slight degree, the variability will not be of the
same exact nature, and consequently the results obtained through natural
selection for the same general purpose will not be the same. We should
also bear in mind that every highly developed organism has passed
through many changes; and that each modified structure tends to be
inherited, so that each modification will not readily be quite lost,
but may be again and again further altered. Hence, the structure of each
part of each species, for whatever purpose it may serve, is the sum of
many inherited changes, through which the species has passed during its
successive adaptations to changed habits and conditions of life.

Finally, then, although in many cases it is most difficult even to
conjecture by what transitions organs could have arrived at their
present state; yet, considering how small the proportion of living and
known forms is to the extinct and unknown, I have been astonished how
rarely an organ can be named, towards which no transitional grade is
known to lead. It is certainly true, that new organs appearing as if
created for some special purpose rarely or never appear in any being; as
indeed is shown by that old, but somewhat exaggerated, canon in natural
history of "Natura non facit saltum." We meet with this admission in the
writings of almost every experienced naturalist; or, as Milne Edwards
has well expressed it, "Nature is prodigal in variety, but niggard in
innovation." Why, on the theory of Creation, should there be so much
variety and so little real novelty? Why should all the parts and organs
of many independent beings, each supposed to have been separately
created for its own proper place in nature, be so commonly linked
together by graduated steps? Why should not Nature take a sudden leap
from structure to structure? On the theory of natural selection, we can
clearly understand why she should not; for natural selection acts only
by taking advantage of slight successive variations; she can never take
a great and sudden leap, but must advance by the short and sure, though
slow steps.

ORGANS OF LITTLE APPARENT IMPORTANCE, AS AFFECTED BY NATURAL SELECTION.

As natural selection acts by life and death, by the survival of the
fittest, and by the destruction of the less well-fitted individuals,
I have sometimes felt great difficulty in understanding the origin or
formation of parts of little importance; almost as great, though of
a very different kind, as in the case of the most perfect and complex
organs.

In the first place, we are much too ignorant in regard to the whole
economy of any one organic being to say what slight modifications would
be of importance or not. In a former chapter I have given instances of
very trifling characters, such as the down on fruit and the colour of
its flesh, the colour of the skin and hair of quadrupeds, which, from
being correlated with constitutional differences, or from determining
the attacks of insects, might assuredly be acted on by natural
selection. The tail of the giraffe looks like an artificially
constructed fly-flapper; and it seems at first incredible that this
could have been adapted for its present purpose by successive slight
modifications, each better and better fitted, for so trifling an object
as to drive away flies; yet we should pause before being too positive
even in this case, for we know that the distribution and existence of
cattle and other animals in South America absolutely depend on their
power of resisting the attacks of insects: so that individuals which
could by any means defend themselves from these small enemies, would be
able to range into new pastures and thus gain a great advantage. It is
not that the larger quadrupeds are actually destroyed (except in some
rare cases) by flies, but they are incessantly harassed and their
strength reduced, so that they are more subject to disease, or not so
well enabled in a coming dearth to search for food, or to escape from
beasts of prey.

Organs now of trifling importance have probably in some cases been of
high importance to an early progenitor, and, after having been slowly
perfected at a former period, have been transmitted to existing species
in nearly the same state, although now of very slight use; but any
actually injurious deviations in their structure would of course have
been checked by natural selection. Seeing how important an organ of
locomotion the tail is in most aquatic animals, its general presence and
use for many purposes in so many land animals, which in their lungs or
modified swim-bladders betray their aquatic origin, may perhaps be thus
accounted for. A well-developed tail having been formed in an aquatic
animal, it might subsequently come to be worked in for all sorts of
purposes, as a fly-flapper, an organ of prehension, or as an aid in
turning, as in the case of the dog, though the aid in this latter
respect must be slight, for the hare, with hardly any tail, can double
still more quickly.

In the second place, we may easily err in attributing importance to
characters, and in believing that they have been developed through
natural selection. We must by no means overlook the effects of the
definite action of changed conditions of life, of so-called spontaneous
variations, which seem to depend in a quite subordinate degree on the
nature of the conditions, of the tendency to reversion to long-lost
characters, of the complex laws of growth, such as of correlation,
comprehension, of the pressure of one part on another, etc., and finally
of sexual selection, by which characters of use to one sex are often
gained and then transmitted more or less perfectly to the other sex,
though of no use to the sex. But structures thus indirectly gained,
although at first of no advantage to a species, may subsequently
have been taken advantage of by its modified descendants, under new
conditions of life and newly acquired habits.

If green woodpeckers alone had existed, and we did not know that there
were many black and pied kinds, I dare say that we should have thought
that the green colour was a beautiful adaptation to conceal this
tree-frequenting bird from its enemies; and consequently that it was
a character of importance, and had been acquired through natural
selection; as it is, the colour is probably in chief part due to sexual
selection. A trailing palm in the Malay Archipelago climbs the loftiest
trees by the aid of exquisitely constructed hooks clustered around the
ends of the branches, and this contrivance, no doubt, is of the highest
service to the plant; but as we see nearly similar hooks on many trees
which are not climbers, and which, as there is reason to believe from
the distribution of the thorn-bearing species in Africa and South
America, serve as a defence against browsing quadrupeds, so the spikes
on the palm may at first have been developed for this object, and
subsequently have been improved and taken advantage of by the plant, as
it underwent further modification and became a climber. The naked skin
on the head of a vulture is generally considered as a direct adaptation
for wallowing in putridity; and so it may be, or it may possibly be due
to the direct action of putrid matter; but we should be very cautious in
drawing any such inference, when we see that the skin on the head of the
clean-feeding male turkey is likewise naked. The sutures in the skulls
of young mammals have been advanced as a beautiful adaptation for aiding
parturition, and no doubt they facilitate, or may be indispensable
for this act; but as sutures occur in the skulls of young birds and
reptiles, which have only to escape from a broken egg, we may infer that
this structure has arisen from the laws of growth, and has been taken
advantage of in the parturition of the higher animals.

We are profoundly ignorant of the cause of each slight variation or
individual difference; and we are immediately made conscious of this
by reflecting on the differences between the breeds of our domesticated
animals in different countries, more especially in the less civilized
countries, where there has been but little methodical selection. Animals
kept by savages in different countries often have to struggle for
their own subsistence, and are exposed to a certain extent to natural
selection, and individuals with slightly different constitutions would
succeed best under different climates. With cattle susceptibility to the
attacks of flies is correlated with colour, as is the liability to be
poisoned by certain plants; so that even colour would be thus subjected
to the action of natural selection. Some observers are convinced that a
damp climate affects the growth of the hair, and that with the hair the
horns are correlated. Mountain breeds always differ from lowland breeds;
and a mountainous country would probably affect the hind limbs from
exercising them more, and possibly even the form of the pelvis; and then
by the law of homologous variation, the front limbs and the head would
probably be affected. The shape, also, of the pelvis might affect
by pressure the shape of certain parts of the young in the womb. The
laborious breathing necessary in high regions tends, as we have
good reason to believe, to increase the size of the chest; and again
correlation would come into play. The effects of lessened exercise,
together with abundant food, on the whole organisation is probably still
more important, and this, as H. von Nathusius has lately shown in
his excellent Treatise, is apparently one chief cause of the great
modification which the breeds of swine have undergone. But we are far
too ignorant to speculate on the relative importance of the several
known and unknown causes of variation; and I have made these remarks
only to show that, if we are unable to account for the characteristic
differences of our several domestic breeds, which nevertheless are
generally admitted to have arisen through ordinary generation from
one or a few parent-stocks, we ought not to lay too much stress on
our ignorance of the precise cause of the slight analogous differences
between true species.

UTILITARIAN DOCTRINE, HOW FAR TRUE: BEAUTY, HOW ACQUIRED.

The foregoing remarks lead me to say a few words on the protest lately
made by some naturalists against the utilitarian doctrine that every
detail of structure has been produced for the good of its possessor.
They believe that many structures have been created for the sake of
beauty, to delight man or the Creator (but this latter point is beyond
the scope of scientific discussion), or for the sake of mere variety,
a view already discussed. Such doctrines, if true, would be absolutely
fatal to my theory. I fully admit that many structures are now of no
direct use to their possessors, and may never have been of any use to
their progenitors; but this does not prove that they were formed
solely for beauty or variety. No doubt the definite action of changed
conditions, and the various causes of modifications, lately specified,
have all produced an effect, probably a great effect, independently of
any advantage thus gained. But a still more important consideration is
that the chief part of the organisation of every living creature is due
to inheritance; and consequently, though each being assuredly is well
fitted for its place in nature, many structures have now no very close
and direct relation to present habits of life. Thus, we can
hardly believe that the webbed feet of the upland goose, or of the
frigate-bird, are of special use to these birds; we cannot believe
that the similar bones in the arm of the monkey, in the fore leg of the
horse, in the wing of the bat, and in the flipper of the seal, are of
special use to these animals. We may safely attribute these structures
to inheritance. But webbed feet no doubt were as useful to the
progenitor of the upland goose and of the frigate-bird, as they now
are to the most aquatic of living birds. So we may believe that the
progenitor of the seal did not possess a flipper, but a foot with five
toes fitted for walking or grasping; and we may further venture to
believe that the several bones in the limbs of the monkey, horse and
bat, were originally developed, on the principle of utility, probably
through the reduction of more numerous bones in the fin of some ancient
fish-like progenitor of the whole class. It is scarcely possible to
decide how much allowance ought to be made for such causes of change,
as the definite action of external conditions, so-called spontaneous
variations, and the complex laws of growth; but with these important
exceptions, we may conclude that the structure of every living creature
either now is, or was formerly, of some direct or indirect use to its
possessor.

With respect to the belief that organic beings have been created
beautiful for the delight of man--a belief which it has been pronounced
is subversive of my whole theory--I may first remark that the sense of
beauty obviously depends on the nature of the mind, irrespective of
any real quality in the admired object; and that the idea of what is
beautiful, is not innate or unalterable. We see this, for instance, in
the men of different races admiring an entirely different standard of
beauty in their women. If beautiful objects had been created solely for
man's gratification, it ought to be shown that before man appeared
there was less beauty on the face of the earth than since he came on the
stage. Were the beautiful volute and cone shells of the Eocene epoch,
and the gracefully sculptured ammonites of the Secondary period, created
that man might ages afterwards admire them in his cabinet? Few objects
are more beautiful than the minute siliceous cases of the diatomaceae:
were these created that they might be examined and admired under the
higher powers of the microscope? The beauty in this latter case, and
in many others, is apparently wholly due to symmetry of growth. Flowers
rank among the most beautiful productions of nature; but they have
been rendered conspicuous in contrast with the green leaves, and in
consequence at the same time beautiful, so that they may be easily
observed by insects. I have come to this conclusion from finding it an
invariable rule that when a flower is fertilised by the wind it never
has a gaily-coloured corolla. Several plants habitually produce two
kinds of flowers; one kind open and coloured so as to attract insects;
the other closed, not coloured, destitute of nectar, and never visited
by insects. Hence, we may conclude that, if insects had not been
developed on the face of the earth, our plants would not have been
decked with beautiful flowers, but would have produced only such poor
flowers as we see on our fir, oak, nut and ash trees, on grasses,
spinach, docks and nettles, which are all fertilised through the agency
of the wind. A similar line of argument holds good with fruits; that
a ripe strawberry or cherry is as pleasing to the eye as to the
palate--that the gaily-coloured fruit of the spindle-wood tree and the
scarlet berries of the holly are beautiful objects--will be admitted by
everyone. But this beauty serves merely as a guide to birds and
beasts, in order that the fruit may be devoured and the matured seeds
disseminated. I infer that this is the case from having as yet found
no exception to the rule that seeds are always thus disseminated when
embedded within a fruit of any kind (that is within a fleshy or
pulpy envelope), if it be coloured of any brilliant tint, or rendered
conspicuous by being white or black.

On the other hand, I willingly admit that a great number of male
animals, as all our most gorgeous birds, some fishes, reptiles, and
mammals, and a host of magnificently coloured butterflies, have been
rendered beautiful for beauty's sake. But this has been effected through
sexual selection, that is, by the more beautiful males having been
continually preferred by the females, and not for the delight of man. So
it is with the music of birds. We may infer from all this that a nearly
similar taste for beautiful colours and for musical sounds runs through
a large part of the animal kingdom. When the female is as beautifully
coloured as the male, which is not rarely the case with birds and
butterflies, the cause apparently lies in the colours acquired through
sexual selection having been transmitted to both sexes, instead of to
the males alone. How the sense of beauty in its simplest form--that is,
the reception of a peculiar kind of pleasure from certain colours, forms
and sounds--was first developed in the mind of man and of the lower
animals, is a very obscure subject. The same sort of difficulty is
presented if we enquire how it is that certain flavours and odours give
pleasure, and others displeasure. Habit in all these cases appears
to have come to a certain extent into play; but there must be some
fundamental cause in the constitution of the nervous system in each
species.

Natural selection cannot possibly produce any modification in a species
exclusively for the good of another species; though throughout
nature one species incessantly takes advantage of, and profits by the
structures of others. But natural selection can and does often produce
structures for the direct injury of other animals, as we see in the fang
of the adder, and in the ovipositor of the ichneumon, by which its eggs
are deposited in the living bodies of other insects. If it could be
proved that any part of the structure of any one species had been
formed for the exclusive good of another species, it would annihilate my
theory, for such could not have been produced through natural selection.
Although many statements may be found in works on natural history to
this effect, I cannot find even one which seems to me of any weight. It
is admitted that the rattlesnake has a poison-fang for its own defence
and for the destruction of its prey; but some authors suppose that at
the same time it is furnished with a rattle for its own injury, namely,
to warn its prey. I would almost as soon believe that the cat curls the
end of its tail when preparing to spring, in order to warn the doomed
mouse. It is a much more probable view that the rattlesnake uses its
rattle, the cobra expands its frill and the puff-adder swells while
hissing so loudly and harshly, in order to alarm the many birds and
beasts which are known to attack even the most venomous species. Snakes
act on the same principle which makes the hen ruffle her feathers and
expand her wings when a dog approaches her chickens. But I have not
space here to enlarge on the many ways by which animals endeavour to
frighten away their enemies.

Natural selection will never produce in a being any structure more
injurious than beneficial to that being, for natural selection acts
solely by and for the good of each. No organ will be formed, as Paley
has remarked, for the purpose of causing pain or for doing an injury
to its possessor. If a fair balance be struck between the good and evil
caused by each part, each will be found on the whole advantageous. After
the lapse of time, under changing conditions of life, if any part comes
to be injurious, it will be modified; or if it be not so, the being will
become extinct, as myriads have become extinct.

Natural selection tends only to make each organic being as perfect as,
or slightly more perfect than the other inhabitants of the same country
with which it comes into competition. And we see that this is the
standard of perfection attained under nature. The endemic productions of
New Zealand, for instance, are perfect, one compared with another; but
they are now rapidly yielding before the advancing legions of plants
and animals introduced from Europe. Natural selection will not produce
absolute perfection, nor do we always meet, as far as we can judge, with
this high standard under nature. The correction for the aberration of
light is said by Muller not to be perfect even in that most perfect
organ, the human eye. Helmholtz, whose judgment no one will dispute,
after describing in the strongest terms the wonderful powers of the
human eye, adds these remarkable words: "That which we have discovered
in the way of inexactness and imperfection in the optical machine and
in the image on the retina, is as nothing in comparison with the
incongruities which we have just come across in the domain of the
sensations. One might say that nature has taken delight in accumulating
contradictions in order to remove all foundation from the theory of a
pre-existing harmony between the external and internal worlds." If our
reason leads us to admire with enthusiasm a multitude of inimitable
contrivances in nature, this same reason tells us, though we may easily
err on both sides, that some other contrivances are less perfect. Can we
consider the sting of the bee as perfect, which, when used against many
kinds of enemies, cannot be withdrawn, owing to the backward serratures,
and thus inevitably causes the death of the insect by tearing out its
viscera?

If we look at the sting of the bee, as having existed in a remote
progenitor, as a boring and serrated instrument, like that in so many
members of the same great order, and that it has since been modified
but not perfected for its present purpose, with the poison originally
adapted for some other object, such as to produce galls, since
intensified, we can perhaps understand how it is that the use of the
sting should so often cause the insect's own death: for if on the whole
the power of stinging be useful to the social community, it will fulfil
all the requirements of natural selection, though it may cause the death
of some few members. If we admire the truly wonderful power of scent by
which the males of many insects find their females, can we admire the
production for this single purpose of thousands of drones, which are
utterly useless to the community for any other purpose, and which are
ultimately slaughtered by their industrious and sterile sisters? It may
be difficult, but we ought to admire the savage instinctive hatred
of the queen-bee, which urges her to destroy the young queens, her
daughters, as soon as they are born, or to perish herself in the combat;
for undoubtedly this is for the good of the community; and maternal love
or maternal hatred, though the latter fortunately is most rare, is all
the same to the inexorable principles of natural selection. If we admire
the several ingenious contrivances by which orchids and many other
plants are fertilised through insect agency, can we consider as equally
perfect the elaboration of dense clouds of pollen by our fir-trees, so
that a few granules may be wafted by chance on to the ovules?

SUMMARY: THE LAW OF UNITY OF TYPE AND OF THE CONDITIONS OF EXISTENCE
EMBRACED BY THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION.

We have in this chapter discussed some of the difficulties and
objections which may be urged against the theory. Many of them are
serious; but I think that in the discussion light has been thrown on
several facts, which on the belief of independent acts of creation are
utterly obscure. We have seen that species at any one period are not
indefinitely variable, and are not linked together by a multitude of
intermediate gradations, partly because the process of natural selection
is always very slow, and at any one time acts only on a few forms;
and partly because the very process of natural selection implies the
continual supplanting and extinction of preceding and intermediate
gradations. Closely allied species, now living on a continuous area,
must often have been formed when the area was not continuous, and when
the conditions of life did not insensibly graduate away from one part to
another. When two varieties are formed in two districts of a continuous
area, an intermediate variety will often be formed, fitted for an
intermediate zone; but from reasons assigned, the intermediate variety
will usually exist in lesser numbers than the two forms which it
connects; consequently the two latter, during the course of further
modification, from existing in greater numbers, will have a great
advantage over the less numerous intermediate variety, and will thus
generally succeed in supplanting and exterminating it.

We have seen in this chapter how cautious we should be in concluding
that the most different habits of life could not graduate into each
other; that a bat, for instance, could not have been formed by natural
selection from an animal which at first only glided through the air.

We have seen that a species under new conditions of life may change its
habits, or it may have diversified habits, with some very unlike those
of its nearest congeners. Hence we can understand, bearing in mind that
each organic being is trying to live wherever it can live, how it has
arisen that there are upland geese with webbed feet, ground woodpeckers,
diving thrushes, and petrels with the habits of auks.

Although the belief that an organ so perfect as the eye could have been
formed by natural selection, is enough to stagger any one; yet in
the case of any organ, if we know of a long series of gradations in
complexity, each good for its possessor, then under changing conditions
of life, there is no logical impossibility in the acquirement of any
conceivable degree of perfection through natural selection. In the cases
in which we know of no intermediate or transitional states, we should
be extremely cautious in concluding that none can have existed, for the
metamorphoses of many organs show what wonderful changes in function
are at least possible. For instance, a swim-bladder has apparently been
converted into an air-breathing lung. The same organ having performed
simultaneously very different functions, and then having been in part
or in whole specialised for one function; and two distinct organs
having performed at the same time the same function, the one having been
perfected whilst aided by the other, must often have largely facilitated
transitions.

We have seen that in two beings widely remote from each other in the
natural scale, organs serving for the same purpose and in external
appearance closely similar may have been separately and independently
formed; but when such organs are closely examined, essential differences
in their structure can almost always be detected; and this naturally
follows from the principle of natural selection. On the other hand, the
common rule throughout nature is infinite diversity of structure for
gaining the same end; and this again naturally follows from the same
great principle.

In many cases we are far too ignorant to be enabled to assert that
a part or organ is so unimportant for the welfare of a species, that
modifications in its structure could not have been slowly accumulated
by means of natural selection. In many other cases, modifications
are probably the direct result of the laws of variation or of growth,
independently of any good having been thus gained. But even such
structures have often, as we may feel assured, been subsequently taken
advantage of, and still further modified, for the good of species under
new conditions of life. We may, also, believe that a part formerly of
high importance has frequently been retained (as the tail of an aquatic
animal by its terrestrial descendants), though it has become of such
small importance that it could not, in its present state, have been
acquired by means of natural selection.

Natural selection can produce nothing in one species for the exclusive
good or injury of another; though it may well produce parts, organs, and
excretions highly useful or even indispensable, or highly injurious
to another species, but in all cases at the same time useful to the
possessor. In each well-stocked country natural selection acts through
the competition of the inhabitants and consequently leads to success
in the battle for life, only in accordance with the standard of that
particular country. Hence the inhabitants of one country, generally the
smaller one, often yield to the inhabitants of another and generally the
larger country. For in the larger country there will have existed more
individuals, and more diversified forms, and the competition will
have been severer, and thus the standard of perfection will have been
rendered higher. Natural selection will not necessarily lead to absolute
perfection; nor, as far as we can judge by our limited faculties, can
absolute perfection be everywhere predicated.

On the theory of natural selection we can clearly understand the full
meaning of that old canon in natural history, "Natura non facit saltum."
This canon, if we look to the present inhabitants alone of the world, is
not strictly correct; but if we include all those of past times, whether
known or unknown, it must on this theory be strictly true.

It is generally acknowledged that all organic beings have been formed on
two great laws--Unity of Type, and the Conditions of Existence. By unity
of type is meant that fundamental agreement in structure which we see
in organic beings of the same class, and which is quite independent of
their habits of life. On my theory, unity of type is explained by unity
of descent. The expression of conditions of existence, so often insisted
on by the illustrious Cuvier, is fully embraced by the principle of
natural selection. For natural selection acts by either now adapting the
varying parts of each being to its organic and inorganic conditions
of life; or by having adapted them during past periods of time: the
adaptations being aided in many cases by the increased use or disuse
of parts, being affected by the direct action of external conditions
of life, and subjected in all cases to the several laws of growth and
variation. Hence, in fact, the law of the Conditions of Existence is the
higher law; as it includes, through the inheritance of former variations
and adaptations, that of Unity of Type.




CHAPTER VII. MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTIONS TO THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION.

 Longevity--Modifications not necessarily simultaneous--Modifications
 apparently of no direct service--Progressive development--Characters of
 small functional importance, the most constant--Supposed incompetence
 of natural selection to account for the incipient stages of useful
 structures--Causes which interfere with the acquisition through natural
 selection of useful structures--Gradations of structure with changed
 functions--Widely different organs in members of the same class,
 developed from one and the same source--Reasons for disbelieving in
 great and abrupt modifications.


I will devote this chapter to the consideration of various miscellaneous
objections which have been advanced against my views, as some of the
previous discussions may thus be made clearer; but it would be useless
to discuss all of them, as many have been made by writers who have not
taken the trouble to understand the subject. Thus a distinguished German
naturalist has asserted that the weakest part of my theory is, that I
consider all organic beings as imperfect: what I have really said is,
that all are not as perfect as they might have been in relation to their
conditions; and this is shown to be the case by so many native forms
in many quarters of the world having yielded their places to intruding
foreigners. Nor can organic beings, even if they were at any one time
perfectly adapted to their conditions of life, have remained so, when
their conditions changed, unless they themselves likewise changed; and
no one will dispute that the physical conditions of each country, as
well as the number and kinds of its inhabitants, have undergone many
mutations.

A critic has lately insisted, with some parade of mathematical accuracy,
that longevity is a great advantage to all species, so that he who
believes in natural selection "must arrange his genealogical tree" in
such a manner that all the descendants have longer lives than their
progenitors! Cannot our critics conceive that a biennial plant or one of
the lower animals might range into a cold climate and perish there every
winter; and yet, owing to advantages gained through natural selection,
survive from year to year by means of its seeds or ova? Mr. E. Ray
Lankester has recently discussed this subject, and he concludes, as far
as its extreme complexity allows him to form a judgment, that longevity
is generally related to the standard of each species in the scale of
organisation, as well as to the amount of expenditure in reproduction
and in general activity. And these conditions have, it is probable, been
largely determined through natural selection.

It has been argued that, as none of the animals and plants of Egypt,
of which we know anything, have changed during the last three or four
thousand years, so probably have none in any part of the world. But, as
Mr. G.H. Lewes has remarked, this line of argument proves too much,
for the ancient domestic races figured on the Egyptian monuments, or
embalmed, are closely similar or even identical with those now living;
yet all naturalists admit that such races have been produced through
the modification of their original types. The many animals which have
remained unchanged since the commencement of the glacial period, would
have been an incomparably stronger case, for these have been exposed
to great changes of climate and have migrated over great distances;
whereas, in Egypt, during the last several thousand years, the
conditions of life, as far as we know, have remained absolutely uniform.
The fact of little or no modification having been effected since the
glacial period, would have been of some avail against those who believe
in an innate and necessary law of development, but is powerless against
the doctrine of natural selection or the survival of the fittest, which
implies that when variations or individual differences of a beneficial
nature happen to arise, these will be preserved; but this will be
effected only under certain favourable circumstances.

The celebrated palaeontologist, Bronn, at the close of his German
translation of this work, asks how, on the principle of natural
selection, can a variety live side by side with the parent species?
If both have become fitted for slightly different habits of life
or conditions, they might live together; and if we lay on one side
polymorphic species, in which the variability seems to be of a peculiar
nature, and all mere temporary variations, such as size, albinism,
etc., the more permanent varieties are generally found, as far as I can
discover, inhabiting distinct stations, such as high land or low land,
dry or moist districts. Moreover, in the case of animals which wander
much about and cross freely, their varieties seem to be generally
confined to distinct regions.

Bronn also insists that distinct species never differ from each other in
single characters, but in many parts; and he asks, how it always comes
that many parts of the organisation should have been modified at the
same time through variation and natural selection? But there is no
necessity for supposing that all the parts of any being have been
simultaneously modified. The most striking modifications, excellently
adapted for some purpose, might, as was formerly remarked, be acquired
by successive variations, if slight, first in one part and then in
another; and as they would be transmitted all together, they would
appear to us as if they had been simultaneously developed. The best
answer, however, to the above objection is afforded by those domestic
races which have been modified, chiefly through man's power of
selection, for some special purpose. Look at the race and dray-horse, or
at the greyhound and mastiff. Their whole frames, and even their mental
characteristics, have been modified; but if we could trace each step
in the history of their transformation--and the latter steps can be
traced--we should not see great and simultaneous changes, but first
one part and then another slightly modified and improved. Even when
selection has been applied by man to some one character alone--of which
our cultivated plants offer the best instances--it will invariably be
found that although this one part, whether it be the flower, fruit, or
leaves, has been greatly changed, almost all the other parts have been
slightly modified. This may be attributed partly to the principle of
correlated growth, and partly to so-called spontaneous variation.

A much more serious objection has been urged by Bronn, and recently by
Broca, namely, that many characters appear to be of no service whatever
to their possessors, and therefore cannot have been influenced through
natural selection. Bronn adduces the length of the ears and tails in the
different species of hares and mice--the complex folds of enamel in the
teeth of many animals, and a multitude of analogous cases. With respect
to plants, this subject has been discussed by Nageli in an admirable
essay. He admits that natural selection has effected much, but he
insists that the families of plants differ chiefly from each other in
morphological characters, which appear to be quite unimportant for the
welfare of the species. He consequently believes in an innate tendency
towards progressive and more perfect development. He specifies the
arrangement of the cells in the tissues, and of the leaves on the axis,
as cases in which natural selection could not have acted. To these
may be added the numerical divisions in the parts of the flower, the
position of the ovules, the shape of the seed, when not of any use for
dissemination, etc.

There is much force in the above objection. Nevertheless, we ought, in
the first place, to be extremely cautious in pretending to decide what
structures now are, or have formerly been, of use to each species. In
the second place, it should always be borne in mind that when one part
is modified, so will be other parts, through certain dimly seen causes,
such as an increased or diminished flow of nutriment to a part, mutual
pressure, an early developed part affecting one subsequently developed,
and so forth--as well as through other causes which lead to the
many mysterious cases of correlation, which we do not in the least
understand. These agencies may be all grouped together, for the sake of
brevity, under the expression of the laws of growth. In the third
place, we have to allow for the direct and definite action of changed
conditions of life, and for so-called spontaneous variations, in which
the nature of the conditions apparently plays a quite subordinate part.
Bud-variations, such as the appearance of a moss-rose on a common rose,
or of a nectarine on a peach-tree, offer good instances of spontaneous
variations; but even in these cases, if we bear in mind the power of a
minute drop of poison in producing complex galls, we ought not to feel
too sure that the above variations are not the effect of some local
change in the nature of the sap, due to some change in the conditions.
There must be some efficient cause for each slight individual
difference, as well as for more strongly marked variations which
occasionally arise; and if the unknown cause were to act persistently,
it is almost certain that all the individuals of the species would be
similarly modified.

In the earlier editions of this work I underrated, as it now seems
probable, the frequency and importance of modifications due to
spontaneous variability. But it is impossible to attribute to this cause
the innumerable structures which are so well adapted to the habits
of life of each species. I can no more believe in this than that
the well-adapted form of a race-horse or greyhound, which before the
principle of selection by man was well understood, excited so much
surprise in the minds of the older naturalists, can thus be explained.

It may be worth while to illustrate some of the foregoing remarks. With
respect to the assumed inutility of various parts and organs, it is
hardly necessary to observe that even in the higher and best-known
animals many structures exist, which are so highly developed that no one
doubts that they are of importance, yet their use has not been, or has
only recently been, ascertained. As Bronn gives the length of the ears
and tail in the several species of mice as instances, though trifling
ones, of differences in structure which can be of no special use, I may
mention that, according to Dr. Schobl, the external ears of the common
mouse are supplied in an extraordinary manner with nerves, so that
they no doubt serve as tactile organs; hence the length of the ears can
hardly be quite unimportant. We shall, also, presently see that the tail
is a highly useful prehensile organ to some of the species; and its use
would be much influence by its length.

With respect to plants, to which on account of Nageli's essay I shall
confine myself in the following remarks, it will be admitted that the
flowers of the orchids present a multitude of curious structures,
which a few years ago would have been considered as mere morphological
differences without any special function; but they are now known to be
of the highest importance for the fertilisation of the species through
the aid of insects, and have probably been gained through natural
selection. No one until lately would have imagined that in dimorphic and
trimorphic plants the different lengths of the stamens and pistils, and
their arrangement, could have been of any service, but now we know this
to be the case.

In certain whole groups of plants the ovules stand erect, and in others
they are suspended; and within the same ovarium of some few plants, one
ovule holds the former and a second ovule the latter position. These
positions seem at first purely morphological, or of no physiological
signification; but Dr. Hooker informs me that within the same ovarium
the upper ovules alone in some cases, and in others the lower ones
alone are fertilised; and he suggests that this probably depends on
the direction in which the pollen-tubes enter the ovarium. If so, the
position of the ovules, even when one is erect and the other suspended
within the same ovarium, would follow the selection of any slight
deviations in position which favoured their fertilisation, and the
production of seed.

Several plants belonging to distinct orders habitually produce flowers
of two kinds--the one open, of the ordinary structure, the other closed
and imperfect. These two kinds of flowers sometimes differ wonderfully
in structure, yet may be seen to graduate into each other on the same
plant. The ordinary and open flowers can be intercrossed; and the
benefits which certainly are derived from this process are thus secured.
The closed and imperfect flowers are, however, manifestly of high
importance, as they yield with the utmost safety a large stock of seed,
with the expenditure of wonderfully little pollen. The two kinds of
flowers often differ much, as just stated, in structure. The petals in
the imperfect flowers almost always consist of mere rudiments, and the
pollen-grains are reduced in diameter. In Ononis columnae five of the
alternate stamens are rudimentary; and in some species of Viola three
stamens are in this state, two retaining their proper function, but
being of very small size. In six out of thirty of the closed flowers in
an Indian violet (name unknown, for the plants have never produced with
me perfect flowers), the sepals are reduced from the normal number of
five to three. In one section of the Malpighiaceae the closed flowers,
according to A. de Jussieu, are still further modified, for the five
stamens which stand opposite to the sepals are all aborted, a sixth
stamen standing opposite to a petal being alone developed; and this
stamen is not present in the ordinary flowers of this species; the style
is aborted; and the ovaria are reduced from three to two. Now although
natural selection may well have had the power to prevent some of
the flowers from expanding, and to reduce the amount of pollen, when
rendered by the closure of the flowers superfluous, yet hardly any of
the above special modifications can have been thus determined, but
must have followed from the laws of growth, including the functional
inactivity of parts, during the progress of the reduction of the pollen
and the closure of the flowers.

It is so necessary to appreciate the important effects of the laws of
growth, that I will give some additional cases of another kind, namely
of differences in the same part or organ, due to differences in relative
position on the same plant. In the Spanish chestnut, and in certain
fir-trees, the angles of divergence of the leaves differ, according to
Schacht, in the nearly horizontal and in the upright branches. In the
common rue and some other plants, one flower, usually the central or
terminal one, opens first, and has five sepals and petals, and five
divisions to the ovarium; while all the other flowers on the plant are
tetramerous. In the British Adoxa the uppermost flower generally has
two calyx-lobes with the other organs tetramerous, while the surrounding
flowers generally have three calyx-lobes with the other organs
pentamerous. In many Compositae and Umbelliferae (and in some other
plants) the circumferential flowers have their corollas much more
developed than those of the centre; and this seems often connected with
the abortion of the reproductive organs. It is a more curious fact,
previously referred to, that the achenes or seeds of the circumference
and centre sometimes differ greatly in form, colour and other
characters. In Carthamus and some other Compositae the central achenes
alone are furnished with a pappus; and in Hyoseris the same head yields
achenes of three different forms. In certain Umbelliferae the exterior
seeds, according to Tausch, are orthospermous, and the central one
coelospermous, and this is a character which was considered by De
Candolle to be in other species of the highest systematic importance.
Professor Braun mentions a Fumariaceous genus, in which the flowers in
the lower part of the spike bear oval, ribbed, one-seeded nutlets; and
in the upper part of the spike, lanceolate, two-valved and two-seeded
siliques. In these several cases, with the exception of that of the
well-developed ray-florets, which are of service in making the flowers
conspicuous to insects, natural selection cannot, as far as we can
judge, have come into play, or only in a quite subordinate manner. All
these modifications follow from the relative position and inter-action
of the parts; and it can hardly be doubted that if all the flowers and
leaves on the same plant had been subjected to the same external and
internal condition, as are the flowers and leaves in certain positions,
all would have been modified in the same manner.

In numerous other cases we find modifications of structure, which are
considered by botanists to be generally of a highly important nature,
affecting only some of the flowers on the same plant, or occurring on
distinct plants, which grow close together under the same conditions. As
these variations seem of no special use to the plants, they cannot
have been influenced by natural selection. Of their cause we are quite
ignorant; we cannot even attribute them, as in the last class of cases,
to any proximate agency, such as relative position. I will give only
a few instances. It is so common to observe on the same plant, flowers
indifferently tetramerous, pentamerous, etc., that I need not give
examples; but as numerical variations are comparatively rare when the
parts are few, I may mention that, according to De Candolle, the flowers
of Papaver bracteatum offer either two sepals with four petals (which
is the common type with poppies), or three sepals with six petals. The
manner in which the petals are folded in the bud is in most groups a
very constant morphological character; but Professor Asa Gray states
that with some species of Mimulus, the aestivation is almost as
frequently that of the Rhinanthideae as of the Antirrhinideae, to which
latter tribe the genus belongs. Aug. St. Hilaire gives the following
cases: the genus Zanthoxylon belongs to a division of the Rutaceae with
a single ovary, but in some species flowers may be found on the same
plant, and even in the same panicle, with either one or two ovaries.
In Helianthemum the capsule has been described as unilocular or
tri-locular; and in H. mutabile, "Une lame PLUS OU MOINS LARGE,
s'etend entre le pericarpe et le placenta." In the flowers of Saponaria
officinalis Dr. Masters has observed instances of both marginal and free
central placentation. Lastly, St. Hilaire found towards the southern
extreme of the range of Gomphia oleaeformis two forms which he did
not at first doubt were distinct species, but he subsequently saw them
growing on the same bush; and he then adds, "Voila donc dans un meme
individu des loges et un style qui se rattachent tantot a un axe
verticale et tantot a un gynobase."

We thus see that with plants many morphological changes may be
attributed to the laws of growth and the inter-action of parts,
independently of natural selection. But with respect to Nageli's
doctrine of an innate tendency towards perfection or progressive
development, can it be said in the case of these strongly pronounced
variations, that the plants have been caught in the act of progressing
towards a higher state of development? On the contrary, I should infer
from the mere fact of the parts in question differing or varying greatly
on the same plant, that such modifications were of extremely small
importance to the plants themselves, of whatever importance they may
generally be to us for our classifications. The acquisition of a useless
part can hardly be said to raise an organism in the natural scale; and
in the case of the imperfect, closed flowers, above described, if any
new principle has to be invoked, it must be one of retrogression rather
than of progression; and so it must be with many parasitic and degraded
animals. We are ignorant of the exciting cause of the above specified
modifications; but if the unknown cause were to act almost uniformly for
a length of time, we may infer that the result would be almost uniform;
and in this case all the individuals of the species would be modified in
the same manner.

From the fact of the above characters being unimportant for the welfare
of the species, any slight variations which occurred in them would
not have been accumulated and augmented through natural selection. A
structure which has been developed through long-continued selection,
when it ceases to be of service to a species, generally becomes
variable, as we see with rudimentary organs; for it will no longer be
regulated by this same power of selection. But when, from the nature
of the organism and of the conditions, modifications have been induced
which are unimportant for the welfare of the species, they may be, and
apparently often have been, transmitted in nearly the same state to
numerous, otherwise modified, descendants. It cannot have been of much
importance to the greater number of mammals, birds, or reptiles, whether
they were clothed with hair, feathers or scales; yet hair has been
transmitted to almost all mammals, feathers to all birds, and scales to
all true reptiles. A structure, whatever it may be, which is common to
many allied forms, is ranked by us as of high systematic importance,
and consequently is often assumed to be of high vital importance to the
species. Thus, as I am inclined to believe, morphological differences,
which we consider as important--such as the arrangement of the leaves,
the divisions of the flower or of the ovarium, the position of the
ovules, etc., first appeared in many cases as fluctuating variations,
which sooner or later became constant through the nature of the organism
and of the surrounding conditions, as well as through the intercrossing
of distinct individuals, but not through natural selection; for as these
morphological characters do not affect the welfare of the species, any
slight deviations in them could not have been governed or accumulated
through this latter agency. It is a strange result which we thus arrive
at, namely, that characters of slight vital importance to the species,
are the most important to the systematist; but, as we shall hereafter
see when we treat of the genetic principle of classification, this is by
no means so paradoxical as it may at first appear.

Although we have no good evidence of the existence in organic beings of
an innate tendency towards progressive development, yet this necessarily
follows, as I have attempted to show in the fourth chapter, through the
continued action of natural selection. For the best definition which
has ever been given of a high standard of organisation, is the degree
to which the parts have been specialised or differentiated; and natural
selection tends towards this end, inasmuch as the parts are thus enabled
to perform their functions more efficiently.

A distinguished zoologist, Mr. St. George Mivart, has recently collected
all the objections which have ever been advanced by myself and others
against the theory of natural selection, as propounded by Mr. Wallace
and myself, and has illustrated them with admirable art and force. When
thus marshalled, they make a formidable array; and as it forms no
part of Mr. Mivart's plan to give the various facts and considerations
opposed to his conclusions, no slight effort of reason and memory is
left to the reader, who may wish to weigh the evidence on both sides.
When discussing special cases, Mr. Mivart passes over the effects of the
increased use and disuse of parts, which I have always maintained to be
highly important, and have treated in my "Variation under Domestication"
at greater length than, as I believe, any other writer. He likewise
often assumes that I attribute nothing to variation, independently of
natural selection, whereas in the work just referred to I have collected
a greater number of well-established cases than can be found in any
other work known to me. My judgment may not be trustworthy, but after
reading with care Mr. Mivart's book, and comparing each section with
what I have said on the same head, I never before felt so strongly
convinced of the general truth of the conclusions here arrived at,
subject, of course, in so intricate a subject, to much partial error.

All Mr. Mivart's objections will be, or have been, considered in the
present volume. The one new point which appears to have struck many
readers is, "That natural selection is incompetent to account for the
incipient stages of useful structures." This subject is intimately
connected with that of the gradation of the characters, often
accompanied by a change of function, for instance, the conversion of a
swim-bladder into lungs, points which were discussed in the last chapter
under two headings. Nevertheless, I will here consider in some detail
several of the cases advanced by Mr. Mivart, selecting those which are
the most illustrative, as want of space prevents me from considering
all.

The giraffe, by its lofty stature, much elongated neck, fore legs, head
and tongue, has its whole frame beautifully adapted for browsing on the
higher branches of trees. It can thus obtain food beyond the reach of
the other Ungulata or hoofed animals inhabiting the same country; and
this must be a great advantage to it during dearths. The Niata cattle
in South America show us how small a difference in structure may make,
during such periods, a great difference in preserving an animal's
life. These cattle can browse as well as others on grass, but from the
projection of the lower jaw they cannot, during the often recurrent
droughts, browse on the twigs of trees, reeds, etc., to which food the
common cattle and horses are then driven; so that at these times the
Niatas perish, if not fed by their owners. Before coming to Mr. Mivart's
objections, it may be well to explain once again how natural selection
will act in all ordinary cases. Man has modified some of his animals,
without necessarily having attended to special points of structure, by
simply preserving and breeding from the fleetest individuals, as with
the race-horse and greyhound, or as with the game-cock, by breeding
from the victorious birds. So under nature with the nascent giraffe, the
individuals which were the highest browsers and were able during dearths
to reach even an inch or two above the others, will often have been
preserved; for they will have roamed over the whole country in search of
food. That the individuals of the same species often differ slightly
in the relative lengths of all their parts may be seen in many works of
natural history, in which careful measurements are given. These slight
proportional differences, due to the laws of growth and variation, are
not of the slightest use or importance to most species. But it will have
been otherwise with the nascent giraffe, considering its probable habits
of life; for those individuals which had some one part or several parts
of their bodies rather more elongated than usual, would generally
have survived. These will have intercrossed and left offspring, either
inheriting the same bodily peculiarities, or with a tendency to vary
again in the same manner; while the individuals less favoured in the
same respects will have been the most liable to perish.

We here see that there is no need to separate single pairs, as man does,
when he methodically improves a breed: natural selection will preserve
and thus separate all the superior individuals, allowing them freely
to intercross, and will destroy all the inferior individuals. By this
process long-continued, which exactly corresponds with what I have
called unconscious selection by man, combined, no doubt, in a most
important manner with the inherited effects of the increased use of
parts, it seems to me almost certain that an ordinary hoofed quadruped
might be converted into a giraffe.

To this conclusion Mr. Mivart brings forward two objections. One is
that the increased size of the body would obviously require an increased
supply of food, and he considers it as "very problematical whether the
disadvantages thence arising would not, in times of scarcity, more than
counterbalance the advantages." But as the giraffe does actually exist
in large numbers in Africa, and as some of the largest antelopes in the
world, taller than an ox, abound there, why should we doubt that, as
far as size is concerned, intermediate gradations could formerly have
existed there, subjected as now to severe dearths. Assuredly the being
able to reach, at each stage of increased size, to a supply of food,
left untouched by the other hoofed quadrupeds of the country, would have
been of some advantage to the nascent giraffe. Nor must we overlook the
fact, that increased bulk would act as a protection against almost all
beasts of prey excepting the lion; and against this animal, its tall
neck--and the taller the better--would, as Mr. Chauncey Wright has
remarked, serve as a watch-tower. It is from this cause, as Sir S. Baker
remarks, that no animal is more difficult to stalk than the giraffe.
This animal also uses its long neck as a means of offence or defence,
by violently swinging its head armed with stump-like horns. The
preservation of each species can rarely be determined by any one
advantage, but by the union of all, great and small.

Mr. Mivart then asks (and this is his second objection), if natural
selection be so potent, and if high browsing be so great an advantage,
why has not any other hoofed quadruped acquired a long neck and lofty
stature, besides the giraffe, and, in a lesser degree, the camel,
guanaco and macrauchenia? Or, again, why has not any member of the
group acquired a long proboscis? With respect to South Africa, which was
formerly inhabited by numerous herds of the giraffe, the answer is not
difficult, and can best be given by an illustration. In every meadow
in England, in which trees grow, we see the lower branches trimmed or
planed to an exact level by the browsing of the horses or cattle; and
what advantage would it be, for instance, to sheep, if kept there, to
acquire slightly longer necks? In every district some one kind of animal
will almost certainly be able to browse higher than the others; and it
is almost equally certain that this one kind alone could have its neck
elongated for this purpose, through natural selection and the effects
of increased use. In South Africa the competition for browsing on the
higher branches of the acacias and other trees must be between giraffe
and giraffe, and not with the other ungulate animals.

Why, in other quarters of the world, various animals belonging to this
same order have not acquired either an elongated neck or a proboscis,
cannot be distinctly answered; but it is as unreasonable to expect a
distinct answer to such a question as why some event in the history of
mankind did not occur in one country while it did in another. We are
ignorant with respect to the conditions which determine the numbers and
range of each species, and we cannot even conjecture what changes of
structure would be favourable to its increase in some new country. We
can, however, see in a general manner that various causes might have
interfered with the development of a long neck or proboscis. To reach
the foliage at a considerable height (without climbing, for which hoofed
animals are singularly ill-constructed) implies greatly increased
bulk of body; and we know that some areas support singularly few large
quadrupeds, for instance South America, though it is so luxuriant,
while South Africa abounds with them to an unparalleled degree. Why this
should be so we do not know; nor why the later tertiary periods should
have been much more favourable for their existence than the present
time. Whatever the causes may have been, we can see that certain
districts and times would have been much more favourable than others for
the development of so large a quadruped as the giraffe.

In order that an animal should acquire some structure specially and
largely developed, it is almost indispensable that several other parts
should be modified and coadapted. Although every part of the body varies
slightly, it does not follow that the necessary parts should always
vary in the right direction and to the right degree. With the different
species of our domesticated animals we know that the parts vary in
a different manner and degree, and that some species are much more
variable than others. Even if the fitting variations did arise, it
does not follow that natural selection would be able to act on them and
produce a structure which apparently would be beneficial to the species.
For instance, if the number of individuals existing in a country is
determined chiefly through destruction by beasts of prey--by external
or internal parasites, etc.--as seems often to be the case, then natural
selection will be able to do little, or will be greatly retarded, in
modifying any particular structure for obtaining food. Lastly, natural
selection is a slow process, and the same favourable conditions must
long endure in order that any marked effect should thus be produced.
Except by assigning such general and vague reasons, we cannot explain
why, in many quarters of the world, hoofed quadrupeds have not acquired
much elongated necks or other means for browsing on the higher branches
of trees.

Objections of the same nature as the foregoing have been advanced by
many writers. In each case various causes, besides the general ones just
indicated, have probably interfered with the acquisition through natural
selection of structures, which it is thought would be beneficial to
certain species. One writer asks, why has not the ostrich acquired the
power of flight? But a moment's reflection will show what an enormous
supply of food would be necessary to give to this bird of the desert
force to move its huge body through the air. Oceanic islands are
inhabited by bats and seals, but by no terrestrial mammals; yet as some
of these bats are peculiar species, they must have long inhabited their
present homes. Therefore Sir C. Lyell asks, and assigns certain reasons
in answer, why have not seals and bats given birth on such islands to
forms fitted to live on the land? But seals would necessarily be first
converted into terrestrial carnivorous animals of considerable size, and
bats into terrestrial insectivorous animals; for the former there would
be no prey; for the bats ground-insects would serve as food, but these
would already be largely preyed on by the reptiles or birds, which first
colonise and abound on most oceanic islands. Gradations of structure,
with each stage beneficial to a changing species, will be favoured only
under certain peculiar conditions. A strictly terrestrial animal, by
occasionally hunting for food in shallow water, then in streams or
lakes, might at last be converted into an animal so thoroughly aquatic
as to brave the open ocean. But seals would not find on oceanic
islands the conditions favourable to their gradual reconversion into a
terrestrial form. Bats, as formerly shown, probably acquired their
wings by at first gliding through the air from tree to tree, like the
so-called flying squirrels, for the sake of escaping from their enemies,
or for avoiding falls; but when the power of true flight had once been
acquired, it would never be reconverted back, at least for the above
purposes, into the less efficient power of gliding through the air.
Bats, might, indeed, like many birds, have had their wings greatly
reduced in size, or completely lost, through disuse; but in this case
it would be necessary that they should first have acquired the power of
running quickly on the ground, by the aid of their hind legs alone, so
as to compete with birds or other ground animals; and for such a change
a bat seems singularly ill-fitted. These conjectural remarks have been
made merely to show that a transition of structure, with each step
beneficial, is a highly complex affair; and that there is nothing
strange in a transition not having occurred in any particular case.

Lastly, more than one writer has asked why have some animals had their
mental powers more highly developed than others, as such development
would be advantageous to all? Why have not apes acquired the
intellectual powers of man? Various causes could be assigned; but as
they are conjectural, and their relative probability cannot be weighed,
it would be useless to give them. A definite answer to the latter
question ought not to be expected, seeing that no one can solve the
simpler problem, why, of two races of savages, one has risen higher in
the scale of civilisation than the other; and this apparently implies
increased brain power.

We will return to Mr. Mivart's other objections. Insects often resemble
for the sake of protection various objects, such as green or decayed
leaves, dead twigs, bits of lichen, flowers, spines, excrement of birds,
and living insects; but to this latter point I shall hereafter recur.
The resemblance is often wonderfully close, and is not confined to
colour, but extends to form, and even to the manner in which the insects
hold themselves. The caterpillars which project motionless like dead
twigs from the bushes on which they feed, offer an excellent instance of
a resemblance of this kind. The cases of the imitation of such objects
as the excrement of birds, are rare and exceptional. On this head,
Mr. Mivart remarks, "As, according to Mr. Darwin's theory, there is a
constant tendency to indefinite variation, and as the minute incipient
variations will be in ALL DIRECTIONS, they must tend to neutralize
each other, and at first to form such unstable modifications that it is
difficult, if not impossible, to see how such indefinite oscillations
of infinitesimal beginnings can ever build up a sufficiently appreciable
resemblance to a leaf, bamboo, or other object, for natural selection to
seize upon and perpetuate."

But in all the foregoing cases the insects in their original state
no doubt presented some rude and accidental resemblance to an object
commonly found in the stations frequented by them. Nor is this at
all improbable, considering the almost infinite number of surrounding
objects and the diversity in form and colour of the hosts of insects
which exist. As some rude resemblance is necessary for the first start,
we can understand how it is that the larger and higher animals do not
(with the exception, as far as I know, of one fish) resemble for the
sake of protection special objects, but only the surface which commonly
surrounds them, and this chiefly in colour. Assuming that an insect
originally happened to resemble in some degree a dead twig or a decayed
leaf, and that it varied slightly in many ways, then all the variations
which rendered the insect at all more like any such object, and thus
favoured its escape, would be preserved, while other variations would
be neglected and ultimately lost; or, if they rendered the insect at
all less like the imitated object, they would be eliminated. There would
indeed be force in Mr. Mivart's objection, if we were to attempt to
account for the above resemblances, independently of natural selection,
through mere fluctuating variability; but as the case stands there is
none.

Nor can I see any force in Mr. Mivart's difficulty with respect to "the
last touches of perfection in the mimicry;" as in the case given by
Mr. Wallace, of a walking-stick insect (Ceroxylus laceratus), which
resembles "a stick grown over by a creeping moss or jungermannia."
So close was this resemblance, that a native Dyak maintained that the
foliaceous excrescences were really moss. Insects are preyed on by birds
and other enemies whose sight is probably sharper than ours, and
every grade in resemblance which aided an insect to escape notice or
detection, would tend towards its preservation; and the more perfect the
resemblance so much the better for the insect. Considering the nature
of the differences between the species in the group which includes
the above Ceroxylus, there is nothing improbable in this insect having
varied in the irregularities on its surface, and in these having become
more or less green-coloured; for in every group the characters which
differ in the several species are the most apt to vary, while the
generic characters, or those common to all the species, are the most
constant.

The Greenland whale is one of the most wonderful animals in the world,
and the baleen, or whalebone, one of its greatest peculiarities. The
baleen consists of a row, on each side of the upper jaw, of about 300
plates or laminae, which stand close together transversely to the longer
axis of the mouth. Within the main row there are some subsidiary rows.
The extremities and inner margins of all the plates are frayed into
stiff bristles, which clothe the whole gigantic palate, and serve to
strain or sift the water, and thus to secure the minute prey on which
these great animals subsist. The middle and longest lamina in the
Greenland whale is ten, twelve, or even fifteen feet in length; but in
the different species of Cetaceans there are gradations in length; the
middle lamina being in one species, according to Scoresby, four feet,
in another three, in another eighteen inches, and in the Balaenoptera
rostrata only about nine inches in length. The quality of the whalebone
also differs in the different species.

With respect to the baleen, Mr. Mivart remarks that if it "had once
attained such a size and development as to be at all useful, then
its preservation and augmentation within serviceable limits would be
promoted by natural selection alone. But how to obtain the beginning of
such useful development?" In answer, it may be asked, why should not
the early progenitors of the whales with baleen have possessed a mouth
constructed something like the lamellated beak of a duck? Ducks,
like whales, subsist by sifting the mud and water; and the family has
sometimes been called Criblatores, or sifters. I hope that I may not
be misconstrued into saying that the progenitors of whales did actually
possess mouths lamellated like the beak of a duck. I wish only to show
that this is not incredible, and that the immense plates of baleen in
the Greenland whale might have been developed from such lamellae by
finely graduated steps, each of service to its possessor.

The beak of a shoveller-duck (Spatula clypeata) is a more beautiful
and complex structure than the mouth of a whale. The upper mandible is
furnished on each side (in the specimen examined by me) with a row or
comb formed of 188 thin, elastic lamellae, obliquely bevelled so as to
be pointed, and placed transversely to the longer axis of the mouth.
They arise from the palate, and are attached by flexible membrane to
the sides of the mandible. Those standing towards the middle are the
longest, being about one-third of an inch in length, and they project
fourteen one-hundredths of an inch beneath the edge. At their bases
there is a short subsidiary row of obliquely transverse lamellae. In
these several respects they resemble the plates of baleen in the mouth
of a whale. But towards the extremity of the beak they differ much, as
they project inward, instead of straight downward. The entire head of
the shoveller, though incomparably less bulky, is about one-eighteenth
of the length of the head of a moderately large Balaenoptera rostrata,
in which species the baleen is only nine inches long; so that if we were
to make the head of the shoveller as long as that of the Balaenoptera,
the lamellae would be six inches in length, that is, two-thirds of the
length of the baleen in this species of whale. The lower mandible of
the shoveller-duck is furnished with lamellae of equal length with these
above, but finer; and in being thus furnished it differs conspicuously
from the lower jaw of a whale, which is destitute of baleen. On the
other hand, the extremities of these lower lamellae are frayed into
fine bristly points, so that they thus curiously resemble the plates
of baleen. In the genus Prion, a member of the distinct family of the
Petrels, the upper mandible alone is furnished with lamellae, which are
well developed and project beneath the margin; so that the beak of this
bird resembles in this respect the mouth of a whale.

From the highly developed structure of the shoveller's beak we may
proceed (as I have learned from information and specimens sent to me by
Mr. Salvin), without any great break, as far as fitness for sifting
is concerned, through the beak of the Merganetta armata, and in some
respects through that of the Aix sponsa, to the beak of the common
duck. In this latter species the lamellae are much coarser than in the
shoveller, and are firmly attached to the sides of the mandible; they
are only about fifty in number on each side, and do not project at
all beneath the margin. They are square-topped, and are edged with
translucent, hardish tissue, as if for crushing food. The edges of the
lower mandible are crossed by numerous fine ridges, which project very
little. Although the beak is thus very inferior as a sifter to that of
a shoveller, yet this bird, as every one knows, constantly uses it for
this purpose. There are other species, as I hear from Mr. Salvin, in
which the lamellae are considerably less developed than in the common
duck; but I do not know whether they use their beaks for sifting the
water.

Turning to another group of the same family. In the Egyptian goose
(Chenalopex) the beak closely resembles that of the common duck; but the
lamellae are not so numerous, nor so distinct from each other, nor do
they project so much inward; yet this goose, as I am informed by Mr. E.
Bartlett, "uses its bill like a duck by throwing the water out at the
corners." Its chief food, however, is grass, which it crops like the
common goose. In this latter bird the lamellae of the upper mandible
are much coarser than in the common duck, almost confluent, about
twenty-seven in number on each side, and terminating upward in
teeth-like knobs. The palate is also covered with hard rounded knobs.
The edges of the lower mandible are serrated with teeth much more
prominent, coarser and sharper than in the duck. The common goose does
not sift the water, but uses its beak exclusively for tearing or cutting
herbage, for which purpose it is so well fitted that it can crop grass
closer than almost any other animal. There are other species of geese,
as I hear from Mr. Bartlett, in which the lamellae are less developed
than in the common goose.

We thus see that a member of the duck family, with a beak constructed
like that of a common goose and adapted solely for grazing, or even
a member with a beak having less well-developed lamellae, might be
converted by small changes into a species like the Egyptian goose--this
into one like the common duck--and, lastly, into one like the shoveller,
provided with a beak almost exclusively adapted for sifting the water;
for this bird could hardly use any part of its beak, except the hooked
tip, for seizing or tearing solid food. The beak of a goose, as I may
add, might also be converted by small changes into one provided with
prominent, recurved teeth, like those of the Merganser (a member of the
same family), serving for the widely different purpose of securing live
fish.

Returning to the whales. The Hyperoodon bidens is destitute of true
teeth in an efficient condition, but its palate is roughened, according
to Lacepede, with small unequal, hard points of horn. There is,
therefore, nothing improbable in supposing that some early Cetacean form
was provided with similar points of horn on the palate, but rather more
regularly placed, and which, like the knobs on the beak of the goose,
aided it in seizing or tearing its food. If so, it will hardly be denied
that the points might have been converted through variation and natural
selection into lamellae as well-developed as those of the Egyptian
goose, in which case they would have been used both for seizing objects
and for sifting the water; then into lamellae like those of the domestic
duck; and so onward, until they became as well constructed as those of
the shoveller, in which case they would have served exclusively as
a sifting apparatus. From this stage, in which the lamellae would be
two-thirds of the length of the plates of baleen in the Balaenoptera
rostrata, gradations, which may be observed in still-existing Cetaceans,
lead us onward to the enormous plates of baleen in the Greenland whale.
Nor is there the least reason to doubt that each step in this scale
might have been as serviceable to certain ancient Cetaceans, with
the functions of the parts slowly changing during the progress of
development, as are the gradations in the beaks of the different
existing members of the duck-family. We should bear in mind that each
species of duck is subjected to a severe struggle for existence, and
that the structure of every part of its frame must be well adapted to
its conditions of life.

The Pleuronectidae, or Flat-fish, are remarkable for their asymmetrical
bodies. They rest on one side--in the greater number of species on the
left, but in some on the right side; and occasionally reversed adult
specimens occur. The lower, or resting-surface, resembles at first sight
the ventral surface of an ordinary fish; it is of a white colour, less
developed in many ways than the upper side, with the lateral fins often
of smaller size. But the eyes offer the most remarkable peculiarity; for
they are both placed on the upper side of the head. During early youth,
however, they stand opposite to each other, and the whole body is then
symmetrical, with both sides equally coloured. Soon the eye proper to
the lower side begins to glide slowly round the head to the upper side;
but does not pass right through the skull, as was formerly thought to be
the case. It is obvious that unless the lower eye did thus travel round,
it could not be used by the fish while lying in its habitual position on
one side. The lower eye would, also, have been liable to be abraded by
the sandy bottom. That the Pleuronectidae are admirably adapted by
their flattened and asymmetrical structure for their habits of life,
is manifest from several species, such as soles, flounders, etc., being
extremely common. The chief advantages thus gained seem to be protection
from their enemies, and facility for feeding on the ground. The
different members, however, of the family present, as Schiodte
remarks, "a long series of forms exhibiting a gradual transition from
Hippoglossus pinguis, which does not in any considerable degree alter
the shape in which it leaves the ovum, to the soles, which are entirely
thrown to one side."

Mr. Mivart has taken up this case, and remarks that a sudden spontaneous
transformation in the position of the eyes is hardly conceivable, in
which I quite agree with him. He then adds: "If the transit was gradual,
then how such transit of one eye a minute fraction of the journey
towards the other side of the head could benefit the individual
is, indeed, far from clear. It seems, even, that such an incipient
transformation must rather have been injurious." But he might have found
an answer to this objection in the excellent observations published
in 1867 by Malm. The Pleuronectidae, while very young and still
symmetrical, with their eyes standing on opposite sides of the head,
cannot long retain a vertical position, owing to the excessive depth of
their bodies, the small size of their lateral fins, and to their being
destitute of a swim-bladder. Hence, soon growing tired, they fall to
the bottom on one side. While thus at rest they often twist, as Malm
observed, the lower eye upward, to see above them; and they do this so
vigorously that the eye is pressed hard against the upper part of the
orbit. The forehead between the eyes consequently becomes, as could be
plainly seen, temporarily contracted in breadth. On one occasion Malm
saw a young fish raise and depress the lower eye through an angular
distance of about seventy degrees.

We should remember that the skull at this early age is cartilaginous and
flexible, so that it readily yields to muscular action. It is also known
with the higher animals, even after early youth, that the skull
yields and is altered in shape, if the skin or muscles be permanently
contracted through disease or some accident. With long-eared rabbits,
if one ear flops forward and downward, its weight drags forward all the
bones of the skull on the same side, of which I have given a figure.
Malm states that the newly-hatched young of perches, salmon, and several
other symmetrical fishes, have the habit of occasionally resting on
one side at the bottom; and he has observed that they often then
strain their lower eyes so as to look upward; and their skulls are thus
rendered rather crooked. These fishes, however, are soon able to hold
themselves in a vertical position, and no permanent effect is thus
produced. With the Pleuronectidae, on the other hand, the older they
grow the more habitually they rest on one side, owing to the increasing
flatness of their bodies, and a permanent effect is thus produced on the
form of the head, and on the position of the eyes. Judging from analogy,
the tendency to distortion would no doubt be increased through the
principle of inheritance. Schiodte believes, in opposition to some other
naturalists, that the Pleuronectidae are not quite symmetrical even
in the embryo; and if this be so, we could understand how it is that
certain species, while young, habitually fall over and rest on the left
side, and other species on the right side. Malm adds, in confirmation
of the above view, that the adult Trachypterus arcticus, which is not a
member of the Pleuronectidae, rests on its left side at the bottom, and
swims diagonally through the water; and in this fish, the two sides
of the head are said to be somewhat dissimilar. Our great authority
on Fishes, Dr. Gunther, concludes his abstract of Malm's paper, by
remarking that "the author gives a very simple explanation of the
abnormal condition of the Pleuronectoids."

We thus see that the first stages of the transit of the eye from one
side of the head to the other, which Mr. Mivart considers would be
injurious, may be attributed to the habit, no doubt beneficial to the
individual and to the species, of endeavouring to look upward with both
eyes, while resting on one side at the bottom. We may also attribute to
the inherited effects of use the fact of the mouth in several kinds
of flat-fish being bent towards the lower surface, with the jaw bones
stronger and more effective on this, the eyeless side of the head, than
on the other, for the sake, as Dr. Traquair supposes, of feeding with
ease on the ground. Disuse, on the other hand, will account for the less
developed condition of the whole inferior half of the body, including
the lateral fins; though Yarrel thinks that the reduced size of these
fins is advantageous to the fish, as "there is so much less room for
their action than with the larger fins above." Perhaps the lesser number
of teeth in the proportion of four to seven in the upper halves of the
two jaws of the plaice, to twenty-five to thirty in the lower halves,
may likewise be accounted for by disuse. From the colourless state of
the ventral surface of most fishes and of many other animals, we may
reasonably suppose that the absence of colour in flat-fish on the side,
whether it be the right or left, which is under-most, is due to the
exclusion of light. But it cannot be supposed that the peculiar speckled
appearance of the upper side of the sole, so like the sandy bed of the
sea, or the power in some species, as recently shown by Pouchet, of
changing their colour in accordance with the surrounding surface, or the
presence of bony tubercles on the upper side of the turbot, are due to
the action of the light. Here natural selection has probably come into
play, as well as in adapting the general shape of the body of these
fishes, and many other peculiarities, to their habits of life. We should
keep in mind, as I have before insisted, that the inherited effects
of the increased use of parts, and perhaps of their disuse, will be
strengthened by natural selection. For all spontaneous variations in the
right direction will thus be preserved; as will those individuals
which inherit in the highest degree the effects of the increased and
beneficial use of any part. How much to attribute in each particular
case to the effects of use, and how much to natural selection, it seems
impossible to decide.

I may give another instance of a structure which apparently owes its
origin exclusively to use or habit. The extremity of the tail in
some American monkeys has been converted into a wonderfully perfect
prehensile organ, and serves as a fifth hand. A reviewer, who agrees
with Mr. Mivart in every detail, remarks on this structure: "It is
impossible to believe that in any number of ages the first slight
incipient tendency to grasp could preserve the lives of the individuals
possessing it, or favour their chance of having and of rearing
offspring." But there is no necessity for any such belief. Habit, and
this almost implies that some benefit great or small is thus derived,
would in all probability suffice for the work. Brehm saw the young of
an African monkey (Cercopithecus) clinging to the under surface of their
mother by their hands, and at the same time they hooked their little
tails round that of their mother. Professor Henslow kept in confinement
some harvest mice (Mus messorius) which do not possess a structurally
prehensive tail; but he frequently observed that they curled their
tails round the branches of a bush placed in the cage, and thus aided
themselves in climbing. I have received an analogous account from Dr.
Gunther, who has seen a mouse thus suspend itself. If the harvest mouse
had been more strictly arboreal, it would perhaps have had its tail
rendered structurally prehensile, as is the case with some members of
the same order. Why Cercopithecus, considering its habits while young,
has not become thus provided, it would be difficult to say. It is,
however, possible that the long tail of this monkey may be of more
service to it as a balancing organ in making its prodigious leaps, than
as a prehensile organ.

The mammary glands are common to the whole class of mammals, and are
indispensable for their existence; they must, therefore, have been
developed at an extremely remote period, and we can know nothing
positively about their manner of development. Mr. Mivart asks: "Is it
conceivable that the young of any animal was ever saved from destruction
by accidentally sucking a drop of scarcely nutritious fluid from an
accidentally hypertrophied cutaneous gland of its mother? And even
if one was so, what chance was there of the perpetuation of such a
variation?" But the case is not here put fairly. It is admitted by most
evolutionists that mammals are descended from a marsupial form; and
if so, the mammary glands will have been at first developed within
the marsupial sack. In the case of the fish (Hippocampus) the eggs are
hatched, and the young are reared for a time, within a sack of this
nature; and an American naturalist, Mr. Lockwood, believes from what he
has seen of the development of the young, that they are nourished by
a secretion from the cutaneous glands of the sack. Now, with the
early progenitors of mammals, almost before they deserved to be thus
designated, is it not at least possible that the young might have been
similarly nourished? And in this case, the individuals which secreted a
fluid, in some degree or manner the most nutritious, so as to partake of
the nature of milk, would in the long run have reared a larger number
of well-nourished offspring, than would the individuals which secreted a
poorer fluid; and thus the cutaneous glands, which are the homologues of
the mammary glands, would have been improved or rendered more effective.
It accords with the widely extended principle of specialisation, that
the glands over a certain space of the sack should have become more
highly developed than the remainder; and they would then have formed a
breast, but at first without a nipple, as we see in the Ornithorhyncus,
at the base of the mammalian series. Through what agency the glands over
a certain space became more highly specialised than the others, I will
not pretend to decide, whether in part through compensation of growth,
the effects of use, or of natural selection.

The development of the mammary glands would have been of no service, and
could not have been affected through natural selection, unless the young
at the same time were able to partake of the secretion. There is no
greater difficulty in understanding how young mammals have instinctively
learned to suck the breast, than in understanding how unhatched chickens
have learned to break the egg-shell by tapping against it with their
specially adapted beaks; or how a few hours after leaving the shell they
have learned to pick up grains of food. In such cases the most probable
solution seems to be, that the habit was at first acquired by practice
at a more advanced age, and afterwards transmitted to the offspring
at an earlier age. But the young kangaroo is said not to suck, only to
cling to the nipple of its mother, who has the power of injecting milk
into the mouth of her helpless, half-formed offspring. On this head
Mr. Mivart remarks: "Did no special provision exist, the young one must
infallibly be choked by the intrusion of the milk into the wind-pipe.
But there IS a special provision. The larynx is so elongated that
it rises up into the posterior end of the nasal passage, and is thus
enabled to give free entrance to the air for the lungs, while the milk
passes harmlessly on each side of this elongated larynx, and so safely
attains the gullet behind it." Mr. Mivart then asks how did natural
selection remove in the adult kangaroo (and in most other mammals, on
the assumption that they are descended from a marsupial form), "this at
least perfectly innocent and harmless structure?" It may be suggested
in answer that the voice, which is certainly of high importance to many
animals, could hardly have been used with full force as long as the
larynx entered the nasal passage; and Professor Flower has suggested
to me that this structure would have greatly interfered with an animal
swallowing solid food.

We will now turn for a short space to the lower divisions of the
animal kingdom. The Echinodermata (star-fishes, sea-urchins, etc.) are
furnished with remarkable organs, called pedicellariae, which consist,
when well developed, of a tridactyle forceps--that is, of one formed of
three serrated arms, neatly fitting together and placed on the summit of
a flexible stem, moved by muscles. These forceps can seize firmly hold
of any object; and Alexander Agassiz has seen an Echinus or sea-urchin
rapidly passing particles of excrement from forceps to forceps down
certain lines of its body, in order that its shell should not be fouled.
But there is no doubt that besides removing dirt of all kinds, they
subserve other functions; and one of these apparently is defence.

With respect to these organs, Mr. Mivart, as on so many previous
occasions, asks: "What would be the utility of the FIRST RUDIMENTARY
BEGINNINGS of such structures, and how could such insipient buddings
have ever preserved the life of a single Echinus?" He adds, "not even
the SUDDEN development of the snapping action would have been beneficial
without the freely movable stalk, nor could the latter have been
efficient without the snapping jaws, yet no minute, nearly indefinite
variations could simultaneously evolve these complex co-ordinations of
structure; to deny this seems to do no less than to affirm a startling
paradox." Paradoxical as this may appear to Mr. Mivart, tridactyle
forcepses, immovably fixed at the base, but capable of a snapping
action, certainly exist on some star-fishes; and this is intelligible
if they serve, at least in part, as a means of defence. Mr. Agassiz, to
whose great kindness I am indebted for much information on the subject,
informs me that there are other star-fishes, in which one of the three
arms of the forceps is reduced to a support for the other two; and
again, other genera in which the third arm is completely lost. In
Echinoneus, the shell is described by M. Perrier as bearing two kinds of
pedicellariae, one resembling those of Echinus, and the other those of
Spatangus; and such cases are always interesting as affording the means
of apparently sudden transitions, through the abortion of one of the two
states of an organ.

With respect to the steps by which these curious organs have been
evolved, Mr. Agassiz infers from his own researches and those of Mr.
Muller, that both in star-fishes and sea-urchins the pedicellariae must
undoubtedly be looked at as modified spines. This may be inferred from
their manner of development in the individual, as well as from a long
and perfect series of gradations in different species and genera, from
simple granules to ordinary spines, to perfect tridactyle pedicellariae.
The gradation extends even to the manner in which ordinary spines
and the pedicellariae, with their supporting calcareous rods, are
articulated to the shell. In certain genera of star-fishes, "the very
combinations needed to show that the pedicellariae are only modified
branching spines" may be found. Thus we have fixed spines, with three
equi-distant, serrated, movable branches, articulated to near their
bases; and higher up, on the same spine, three other movable branches.
Now when the latter arise from the summit of a spine they form, in fact,
a rude tridactyle pedicellariae, and such may be seen on the same spine
together with the three lower branches. In this case the identity in
nature between the arms of the pedicellariae and the movable branches
of a spine, is unmistakable. It is generally admitted that the ordinary
spines serve as a protection; and if so, there can be no reason to doubt
that those furnished with serrated and movable branches likewise serve
for the same purpose; and they would thus serve still more effectively
as soon as by meeting together they acted as a prehensile or snapping
apparatus. Thus every gradation, from an ordinary fixed spine to a fixed
pedicellariae, would be of service.

In certain genera of star-fishes these organs, instead of being fixed
or borne on an immovable support, are placed on the summit of a flexible
and muscular, though short, stem; and in this case they probably
subserve some additional function besides defence. In the sea-urchins
the steps can be followed by which a fixed spine becomes articulated to
the shell, and is thus rendered movable. I wish I had space here to
give a fuller abstract of Mr. Agassiz's interesting observations on the
development of the pedicellariae. All possible gradations, as he adds,
may likewise be found between the pedicellariae of the star-fishes and
the hooks of the Ophiurians, another group of the Echinodermata; and
again between the pedicellariae of sea-urchins and the anchors of the
Holothuriae, also belonging to the same great class.

Certain compound animals, or zoophytes, as they have been termed, namely
the Polyzoa, are provided with curious organs called avicularia. These
differ much in structure in the different species. In their most perfect
condition they curiously resemble the head and beak of a vulture in
miniature, seated on a neck and capable of movement, as is likewise the
lower jaw or mandible. In one species observed by me, all the avicularia
on the same branch often moved simultaneously backwards and forwards,
with the lower jaw widely open, through an angle of about 90 degrees,
in the course of five seconds; and their movement caused the whole
polyzoary to tremble. When the jaws are touched with a needle they seize
it so firmly that the branch can thus be shaken.

Mr. Mivart adduces this case, chiefly on account of the supposed
difficulty of organs, namely the avicularia of the Polyzoa and the
pedicellariae of the Echinodermata, which he considers as "essentially
similar," having been developed through natural selection in widely
distinct divisions of the animal kingdom. But, as far as structure is
concerned, I can see no similarity between tridactyle pedicellariae and
avicularia. The latter resembles somewhat more closely the chelae or
pincers of Crustaceans; and Mr. Mivart might have adduced with equal
appropriateness this resemblance as a special difficulty, or even their
resemblance to the head and beak of a bird. The avicularia are believed
by Mr. Busk, Dr. Smitt and Dr. Nitsche--naturalists who have carefully
studied this group--to be homologous with the zooids and their
cells which compose the zoophyte, the movable lip or lid of the cell
corresponding with the lower and movable mandible of the avicularium.
Mr. Busk, however, does not know of any gradations now existing between
a zooid and an avicularium. It is therefore impossible to conjecture by
what serviceable gradations the one could have been converted into the
other, but it by no means follows from this that such gradations have
not existed.

As the chelae of Crustaceans resemble in some degree the avicularia of
Polyzoa, both serving as pincers, it may be worth while to show that
with the former a long series of serviceable gradations still exists. In
the first and simplest stage, the terminal segment of a limb shuts down
either on the square summit of the broad penultimate segment, or against
one whole side, and is thus enabled to catch hold of an object, but the
limb still serves as an organ of locomotion. We next find one corner of
the broad penultimate segment slightly prominent, sometimes furnished
with irregular teeth, and against these the terminal segment shuts down.
By an increase in the size of this projection, with its shape, as well
as that of the terminal segment, slightly modified and improved, the
pincers are rendered more and more perfect, until we have at last
an instrument as efficient as the chelae of a lobster. And all these
gradations can be actually traced.

Besides the avicularia, the polyzoa possess curious organs called
vibracula. These generally consist of long bristles, capable of movement
and easily excited. In one species examined by me the vibracula were
slightly curved and serrated along the outer margin, and all of them on
the same polyzoary often moved simultaneously; so that, acting like
long oars, they swept a branch rapidly across the object-glass of my
microscope. When a branch was placed on its face, the vibracula became
entangled, and they made violent efforts to free themselves. They are
supposed to serve as a defence, and may be seen, as Mr. Busk remarks,
"to sweep slowly and carefully over the surface of the polyzoary,
removing what might be noxious to the delicate inhabitants of the cells
when their tentacula are protruded." The avicularia, like the vibracula,
probably serve for defence, but they also catch and kill small living
animals, which, it is believed, are afterwards swept by the currents
within reach of the tentacula of the zooids. Some species are provided
with avicularia and vibracula, some with avicularia alone and a few with
vibracula alone.

It is not easy to imagine two objects more widely different in
appearance than a bristle or vibraculum, and an avicularium like the
head of a bird; yet they are almost certainly homologous and have been
developed from the same common source, namely a zooid with its cell.
Hence, we can understand how it is that these organs graduate in some
cases, as I am informed by Mr. Busk, into each other. Thus, with the
avicularia of several species of Lepralia, the movable mandible is so
much produced and is so like a bristle that the presence of the upper
or fixed beak alone serves to determine its avicularian nature. The
vibracula may have been directly developed from the lips of the cells,
without having passed through the avicularian stage; but it seems more
probable that they have passed through this stage, as during the early
stages of the transformation, the other parts of the cell, with the
included zooid, could hardly have disappeared at once. In many cases the
vibracula have a grooved support at the base, which seems to represent
the fixed beak; though this support in some species is quite absent.
This view of the development of the vibracula, if trustworthy, is
interesting; for supposing that all the species provided with avicularia
had become extinct, no one with the most vivid imagination would ever
have thought that the vibracula had originally existed as part of an
organ, resembling a bird's head, or an irregular box or hood. It is
interesting to see two such widely different organs developed from a
common origin; and as the movable lip of the cell serves as a protection
to the zooid, there is no difficulty in believing that all the
gradations, by which the lip became converted first into the lower
mandible of an avicularium, and then into an elongated bristle,
likewise served as a protection in different ways and under different
circumstances.

In the vegetable kingdom Mr. Mivart only alludes to two cases, namely
the structure of the flowers of orchids, and the movements of climbing
plants. With respect to the former, he says: "The explanation of their
ORIGIN is deemed thoroughly unsatisfactory--utterly insufficient to
explain the incipient, infinitesimal beginnings of structures which are
of utility only when they are considerably developed." As I have fully
treated this subject in another work, I will here give only a few
details on one alone of the most striking peculiarities of the flowers
of orchids, namely, their pollinia. A pollinium, when highly developed,
consists of a mass of pollen-grains, affixed to an elastic foot-stalk
or caudicle, and this to a little mass of extremely viscid matter. The
pollinia are by this means transported by insects from one flower to
the stigma of another. In some orchids there is no caudicle to the
pollen-masses, and the grains are merely tied together by fine threads;
but as these are not confined to orchids, they need not here be
considered; yet I may mention that at the base of the orchidaceous
series, in Cypripedium, we can see how the threads were probably
first developed. In other orchids the threads cohere at one end of the
pollen-masses; and this forms the first or nascent trace of a caudicle.
That this is the origin of the caudicle, even when of considerable
length and highly developed, we have good evidence in the aborted
pollen-grains which can sometimes be detected embedded within the
central and solid parts.

With respect to the second chief peculiarity, namely, the little mass
of viscid matter attached to the end of the caudicle, a long series of
gradations can be specified, each of plain service to the plant. In most
flowers belonging to other orders the stigma secretes a little viscid
matter. Now, in certain orchids similar viscid matter is secreted, but
in much larger quantities by one alone of the three stigmas; and this
stigma, perhaps in consequence of the copious secretion, is rendered
sterile. When an insect visits a flower of this kind, it rubs off some
of the viscid matter, and thus at the same time drags away some of the
pollen-grains. From this simple condition, which differs but
little from that of a multitude of common flowers, there are endless
gradations--to species in which the pollen-mass terminates in a very
short, free caudicle--to others in which the caudicle becomes firmly
attached to the viscid matter, with the sterile stigma itself much
modified. In this latter case we have a pollinium in its most highly
developed and perfect condition. He who will carefully examine the
flowers of orchids for himself will not deny the existence of the above
series of gradations--from a mass of pollen-grains merely tied together
by threads, with the stigma differing but little from that of the
ordinary flowers, to a highly complex pollinium, admirably adapted for
transportal by insects; nor will he deny that all the gradations in
the several species are admirably adapted in relation to the general
structure of each flower for its fertilisation by different insects. In
this, and in almost every other case, the enquiry may be pushed further
backwards; and it may be asked how did the stigma of an ordinary flower
become viscid, but as we do not know the full history of any one
group of beings, it is as useless to ask, as it is hopeless to attempt
answering, such questions.

We will now turn to climbing plants. These can be arranged in a long
series, from those which simply twine round a support, to those which I
have called leaf-climbers, and to those provided with tendrils. In these
two latter classes the stems have generally, but not always, lost the
power of twining, though they retain the power of revolving, which the
tendrils likewise possess. The gradations from leaf-climbers to tendril
bearers are wonderfully close, and certain plants may be differently
placed in either class. But in ascending the series from simple twiners
to leaf-climbers, an important quality is added, namely sensitiveness
to a touch, by which means the foot-stalks of the leaves or flowers, or
these modified and converted into tendrils, are excited to bend round
and clasp the touching object. He who will read my memoir on these
plants will, I think, admit that all the many gradations in function and
structure between simple twiners and tendril-bearers are in each case
beneficial in a high degree to the species. For instance, it is clearly
a great advantage to a twining plant to become a leaf-climber; and it is
probable that every twiner which possessed leaves with long foot-stalks
would have been developed into a leaf-climber, if the foot-stalks had
possessed in any slight degree the requisite sensitiveness to a touch.

As twining is the simplest means of ascending a support, and forms the
basis of our series, it may naturally be asked how did plants acquire
this power in an incipient degree, afterwards to be improved and
increased through natural selection. The power of twining depends,
firstly, on the stems while young being extremely flexible (but this
is a character common to many plants which are not climbers); and,
secondly, on their continually bending to all points of the compass, one
after the other in succession, in the same order. By this movement the
stems are inclined to all sides, and are made to move round and round.
As soon as the lower part of a stem strikes against any object and is
stopped, the upper part still goes on bending and revolving, and thus
necessarily twines round and up the support. The revolving movement
ceases after the early growth of each shoot. As in many widely separated
families of plants, single species and single genera possess the power
of revolving, and have thus become twiners, they must have independently
acquired it, and cannot have inherited it from a common progenitor.
Hence, I was led to predict that some slight tendency to a movement of
this kind would be found to be far from uncommon with plants which did
not climb; and that this had afforded the basis for natural selection
to work on and improve. When I made this prediction, I knew of only one
imperfect case, namely, of the young flower-peduncles of a Maurandia
which revolved slightly and irregularly, like the stems of twining
plants, but without making any use of this habit. Soon afterwards
Fritz Muller discovered that the young stems of an Alisma and of a
Linum--plants which do not climb and are widely separated in the natural
system--revolved plainly, though irregularly, and he states that he has
reason to suspect that this occurs with some other plants. These slight
movements appear to be of no service to the plants in question; anyhow,
they are not of the least use in the way of climbing, which is the point
that concerns us. Nevertheless we can see that if the stems of these
plants had been flexible, and if under the conditions to which they are
exposed it had profited them to ascend to a height, then the habit
of slightly and irregularly revolving might have been increased and
utilised through natural selection, until they had become converted into
well-developed twining species.

With respect to the sensitiveness of the foot-stalks of the leaves and
flowers, and of tendrils, nearly the same remarks are applicable as in
the case of the revolving movements of twining plants. As a vast number
of species, belonging to widely distinct groups, are endowed with this
kind of sensitiveness, it ought to be found in a nascent condition in
many plants which have not become climbers. This is the case: I observed
that the young flower-peduncles of the above Maurandia curved themselves
a little towards the side which was touched. Morren found in several
species of Oxalis that the leaves and their foot-stalks moved,
especially after exposure to a hot sun, when they were gently and
repeatedly touched, or when the plant was shaken. I repeated these
observations on some other species of Oxalis with the same result; in
some of them the movement was distinct, but was best seen in the young
leaves; in others it was extremely slight. It is a more important fact
that according to the high authority of Hofmeister, the young shoots and
leaves of all plants move after being shaken; and with climbing plants
it is, as we know, only during the early stages of growth that the
foot-stalks and tendrils are sensitive.

It is scarcely possible that the above slight movements, due to a touch
or shake, in the young and growing organs of plants, can be of any
functional importance to them. But plants possess, in obedience to
various stimuli, powers of movement, which are of manifest importance
to them; for instance, towards and more rarely from the light--in
opposition to, and more rarely in the direction of, the attraction
of gravity. When the nerves and muscles of an animal are excited by
galvanism or by the absorption of strychnine, the consequent movements
may be called an incidental result, for the nerves and muscles have not
been rendered specially sensitive to these stimuli. So with plants it
appears that, from having the power of movement in obedience to certain
stimuli, they are excited in an incidental manner by a touch, or by
being shaken. Hence there is no great difficulty in admitting that in
the case of leaf-climbers and tendril-bearers, it is this tendency which
has been taken advantage of and increased through natural selection. It
is, however, probable, from reasons which I have assigned in my memoir,
that this will have occurred only with plants which had already acquired
the power of revolving, and had thus become twiners.

I have already endeavoured to explain how plants became twiners,
namely, by the increase of a tendency to slight and irregular revolving
movements, which were at first of no use to them; this movement, as
well as that due to a touch or shake, being the incidental result of
the power of moving, gained for other and beneficial purposes. Whether,
during the gradual development of climbing plants, natural selection
has been aided by the inherited effects of use, I will not pretend to
decide; but we know that certain periodical movements, for instance the
so-called sleep of plants, are governed by habit.

I have now considered enough, perhaps more than enough, of the cases,
selected with care by a skilful naturalist, to prove that natural
selection is incompetent to account for the incipient stages of
useful structures; and I have shown, as I hope, that there is no great
difficulty on this head. A good opportunity has thus been afforded for
enlarging a little on gradations of structure, often associated with
strange functions--an important subject, which was not treated at
sufficient length in the former editions of this work. I will now
briefly recapitulate the foregoing cases.

With the giraffe, the continued preservation of the individuals of some
extinct high-reaching ruminant, which had the longest necks, legs, etc.,
and could browse a little above the average height, and the continued
destruction of those which could not browse so high, would have sufficed
for the production of this remarkable quadruped; but the prolonged
use of all the parts, together with inheritance, will have aided in an
important manner in their co-ordination. With the many insects which
imitate various objects, there is no improbability in the belief that
an accidental resemblance to some common object was in each case the
foundation for the work of natural selection, since perfected through
the occasional preservation of slight variations which made the
resemblance at all closer; and this will have been carried on as long
as the insect continued to vary, and as long as a more and more perfect
resemblance led to its escape from sharp-sighted enemies. In certain
species of whales there is a tendency to the formation of irregular
little points of horn on the palate; and it seems to be quite within the
scope of natural selection to preserve all favourable variations, until
the points were converted, first into lamellated knobs or teeth, like
those on the beak of a goose--then into short lamellae, like those of
the domestic ducks--and then into lamellae, as perfect as those of the
shoveller-duck--and finally into the gigantic plates of baleen, as
in the mouth of the Greenland whale. In the family of the ducks, the
lamellae are first used as teeth, then partly as teeth and partly as
a sifting apparatus, and at last almost exclusively for this latter
purpose.

With such structures as the above lamellae of horn or whalebone, habit
or use can have done little or nothing, as far as we can judge, towards
their development. On the other hand, the transportal of the lower eye
of a flat-fish to the upper side of the head, and the formation of
a prehensile tail, may be attributed almost wholly to continued use,
together with inheritance. With respect to the mammae of the higher
animals, the most probable conjecture is that primordially the cutaneous
glands over the whole surface of a marsupial sack secreted a nutritious
fluid; and that these glands were improved in function through natural
selection, and concentrated into a confined area, in which case they
would have formed a mamma. There is no more difficulty in understanding
how the branched spines of some ancient Echinoderm, which served as
a defence, became developed through natural selection into tridactyle
pedicellariae, than in understanding the development of the pincers of
crustaceans, through slight, serviceable modifications in the ultimate
and penultimate segments of a limb, which was at first used solely
for locomotion. In the avicularia and vibracula of the Polyzoa we have
organs widely different in appearance developed from the same source;
and with the vibracula we can understand how the successive gradations
might have been of service. With the pollinia of orchids, the threads
which originally served to tie together the pollen-grains, can be traced
cohering into caudicles; and the steps can likewise be followed by which
viscid matter, such as that secreted by the stigmas of ordinary flowers,
and still subserving nearly but not quite the same purpose, became
attached to the free ends of the caudicles--all these gradations being
of manifest benefit to the plants in question. With respect to climbing
plants, I need not repeat what has been so lately said.

It has often been asked, if natural selection be so potent, why has not
this or that structure been gained by certain species, to which it would
apparently have been advantageous? But it is unreasonable to expect a
precise answer to such questions, considering our ignorance of the past
history of each species, and of the conditions which at the present day
determine its numbers and range. In most cases only general reasons,
but in some few cases special reasons, can be assigned. Thus to adapt
a species to new habits of life, many co-ordinated modifications are
almost indispensable, and it may often have happened that the requisite
parts did not vary in the right manner or to the right degree. Many
species must have been prevented from increasing in numbers through
destructive agencies, which stood in no relation to certain structures,
which we imagine would have been gained through natural selection
from appearing to us advantageous to the species. In this case, as the
struggle for life did not depend on such structures, they could not
have been acquired through natural selection. In many cases complex and
long-enduring conditions, often of a peculiar nature, are necessary for
the development of a structure; and the requisite conditions may seldom
have concurred. The belief that any given structure, which we think,
often erroneously, would have been beneficial to a species, would
have been gained under all circumstances through natural selection, is
opposed to what we can understand of its manner of action. Mr. Mivart
does not deny that natural selection has effected something; but he
considers it as "demonstrably insufficient" to account for the phenomena
which I explain by its agency. His chief arguments have now been
considered, and the others will hereafter be considered. They seem to me
to partake little of the character of demonstration, and to have little
weight in comparison with those in favour of the power of natural
selection, aided by the other agencies often specified. I am bound to
add, that some of the facts and arguments here used by me, have been
advanced for the same purpose in an able article lately published in the
"Medico-Chirurgical Review."

At the present day almost all naturalists admit evolution under some
form. Mr. Mivart believes that species change through "an internal force
or tendency," about which it is not pretended that anything is known.
That species have a capacity for change will be admitted by all
evolutionists; but there is no need, as it seems to me, to invoke
any internal force beyond the tendency to ordinary variability, which
through the aid of selection, by man has given rise to many well-adapted
domestic races, and which, through the aid of natural selection, would
equally well give rise by graduated steps to natural races or species.
The final result will generally have been, as already explained, an
advance, but in some few cases a retrogression, in organisation.

Mr. Mivart is further inclined to believe, and some naturalists agree
with him, that new species manifest themselves "with suddenness and by
modifications appearing at once." For instance, he supposes that the
differences between the extinct three-toed Hipparion and the horse arose
suddenly. He thinks it difficult to believe that the wing of a bird "was
developed in any other way than by a comparatively sudden modification
of a marked and important kind;" and apparently he would extend the
same view to the wings of bats and pterodactyles. This conclusion,
which implies great breaks or discontinuity in the series, appears to me
improbable in the highest degree.

Everyone who believes in slow and gradual evolution, will of course
admit that specific changes may have been as abrupt and as great as
any single variation which we meet with under nature, or even under
domestication. But as species are more variable when domesticated or
cultivated than under their natural conditions, it is not probable that
such great and abrupt variations have often occurred under nature, as
are known occasionally to arise under domestication. Of these latter
variations several may be attributed to reversion; and the characters
which thus reappear were, it is probable, in many cases at first
gained in a gradual manner. A still greater number must be called
monstrosities, such as six-fingered men, porcupine men, Ancon sheep,
Niata cattle, etc.; and as they are widely different in character from
natural species, they throw very little light on our subject. Excluding
such cases of abrupt variations, the few which remain would at best
constitute, if found in a state of nature, doubtful species, closely
related to their parental types.

My reasons for doubting whether natural species have changed as abruptly
as have occasionally domestic races, and for entirely disbelieving that
they have changed in the wonderful manner indicated by Mr. Mivart, are
as follows. According to our experience, abrupt and strongly marked
variations occur in our domesticated productions, singly and at rather
long intervals of time. If such occurred under nature, they would
be liable, as formerly explained, to be lost by accidental causes of
destruction and by subsequent intercrossing; and so it is known to be
under domestication, unless abrupt variations of this kind are specially
preserved and separated by the care of man. Hence, in order that a new
species should suddenly appear in the manner supposed by Mr. Mivart,
it is almost necessary to believe, in opposition to all analogy, that
several wonderfully changed individuals appeared simultaneously within
the same district. This difficulty, as in the case of unconscious
selection by man, is avoided on the theory of gradual evolution, through
the preservation of a large number of individuals, which varied more
or less in any favourable direction, and of the destruction of a large
number which varied in an opposite manner.

That many species have been evolved in an extremely gradual manner,
there can hardly be a doubt. The species and even the genera of many
large natural families are so closely allied together that it is
difficult to distinguish not a few of them. On every continent, in
proceeding from north to south, from lowland to upland, etc., we meet
with a host of closely related or representative species; as we likewise
do on certain distinct continents, which we have reason to believe were
formerly connected. But in making these and the following remarks, I am
compelled to allude to subjects hereafter to be discussed. Look at
the many outlying islands round a continent, and see how many of their
inhabitants can be raised only to the rank of doubtful species. So it is
if we look to past times, and compare the species which have just passed
away with those still living within the same areas; or if we compare
the fossil species embedded in the sub-stages of the same geological
formation. It is indeed manifest that multitudes of species are related
in the closest manner to other species that still exist, or have lately
existed; and it will hardly be maintained that such species have been
developed in an abrupt or sudden manner. Nor should it be forgotten,
when we look to the special parts of allied species, instead of to
distinct species, that numerous and wonderfully fine gradations can be
traced, connecting together widely different structures.

Many large groups of facts are intelligible only on the principle that
species have been evolved by very small steps. For instance, the fact
that the species included in the larger genera are more closely related
to each other, and present a greater number of varieties than do the
species in the smaller genera. The former are also grouped in little
clusters, like varieties round species; and they present other analogies
with varieties, as was shown in our second chapter. On this same
principle we can understand how it is that specific characters are more
variable than generic characters; and how the parts which are developed
in an extraordinary degree or manner are more variable than other parts
of the same species. Many analogous facts, all pointing in the same
direction, could be added.

Although very many species have almost certainly been produced by
steps not greater than those separating fine varieties; yet it may
be maintained that some have been developed in a different and abrupt
manner. Such an admission, however, ought not to be made without strong
evidence being assigned. The vague and in some respects false analogies,
as they have been shown to be by Mr. Chauncey Wright, which have been
advanced in favour of this view, such as the sudden crystallisation of
inorganic substances, or the falling of a facetted spheroid from one
facet to another, hardly deserve consideration. One class of facts,
however, namely, the sudden appearance of new and distinct forms of
life in our geological formations supports at first sight the belief in
abrupt development. But the value of this evidence depends entirely on
the perfection of the geological record, in relation to periods remote
in the history of the world. If the record is as fragmentary as many
geologists strenuously assert, there is nothing strange in new forms
appearing as if suddenly developed.

Unless we admit transformations as prodigious as those advocated by Mr.
Mivart, such as the sudden development of the wings of birds or bats, or
the sudden conversion of a Hipparion into a horse, hardly any light
is thrown by the belief in abrupt modifications on the deficiency of
connecting links in our geological formations. But against the belief in
such abrupt changes, embryology enters a strong protest. It is notorious
that the wings of birds and bats, and the legs of horses or other
quadrupeds, are undistinguishable at an early embryonic period, and
that they become differentiated by insensibly fine steps. Embryological
resemblances of all kinds can be accounted for, as we shall hereafter
see, by the progenitors of our existing species having varied after
early youth, and having transmitted their newly-acquired characters to
their offspring, at a corresponding age. The embryo is thus left almost
unaffected, and serves as a record of the past condition of the species.
Hence it is that existing species during the early stages of their
development so often resemble ancient and extinct forms belonging to the
same class. On this view of the meaning of embryological resemblances,
and indeed on any view, it is incredible that an animal should have
undergone such momentous and abrupt transformations as those above
indicated, and yet should not bear even a trace in its embryonic
condition of any sudden modification, every detail in its structure
being developed by insensibly fine steps.

He who believes that some ancient form was transformed suddenly through
an internal force or tendency into, for instance, one furnished with
wings, will be almost compelled to assume, in opposition to all analogy,
that many individuals varied simultaneously. It cannot be denied that
such abrupt and great changes of structure are widely different from
those which most species apparently have undergone. He will further be
compelled to believe that many structures beautifully adapted to all the
other parts of the same creature and to the surrounding conditions,
have been suddenly produced; and of such complex and wonderful
co-adaptations, he will not be able to assign a shadow of an
explanation. He will be forced to admit that these great and sudden
transformations have left no trace of their action on the embryo.
To admit all this is, as it seems to me, to enter into the realms of
miracle, and to leave those of science.




CHAPTER VIII. INSTINCT.

 Instincts comparable with habits, but different in their
 origin--Instincts graduated--Aphides and ants--Instincts
 variable--Domestic instincts, their origin--Natural instincts of
 the cuckoo, molothrus, ostrich, and parasitic bees--Slave-making
 ants--Hive-bee, its cell-making instinct--Changes of instinct and
 structure not necessarily simultaneous--Difficulties of the theory of
 the Natural Selection of instincts--Neuter or sterile insects--Summary.


Many instincts are so wonderful that their development will probably
appear to the reader a difficulty sufficient to overthrow my whole
theory. I may here premise, that I have nothing to do with the origin of
the mental powers, any more than I have with that of life itself. We are
concerned only with the diversities of instinct and of the other mental
faculties in animals of the same class.

I will not attempt any definition of instinct. It would be easy to show
that several distinct mental actions are commonly embraced by this term;
but every one understands what is meant, when it is said that instinct
impels the cuckoo to migrate and to lay her eggs in other birds'
nests. An action, which we ourselves require experience to enable us to
perform, when performed by an animal, more especially by a very young
one, without experience, and when performed by many individuals in the
same way, without their knowing for what purpose it is performed, is
usually said to be instinctive. But I could show that none of these
characters are universal. A little dose of judgment or reason, as Pierre
Huber expresses it, often comes into play, even with animals low in the
scale of nature.

Frederick Cuvier and several of the older metaphysicians have compared
instinct with habit. This comparison gives, I think, an accurate notion
of the frame of mind under which an instinctive action is performed, but
not necessarily of its origin. How unconsciously many habitual actions
are performed, indeed not rarely in direct opposition to our conscious
will! yet they may be modified by the will or reason. Habits easily
become associated with other habits, with certain periods of time and
states of the body. When once acquired, they often remain constant
throughout life. Several other points of resemblance between instincts
and habits could be pointed out. As in repeating a well-known song,
so in instincts, one action follows another by a sort of rhythm; if a
person be interrupted in a song, or in repeating anything by rote, he is
generally forced to go back to recover the habitual train of thought: so
P. Huber found it was with a caterpillar, which makes a very complicated
hammock; for if he took a caterpillar which had completed its hammock
up to, say, the sixth stage of construction, and put it into a
hammock completed up only to the third stage, the caterpillar simply
re-performed the fourth, fifth, and sixth stages of construction.
If, however, a caterpillar were taken out of a hammock made up, for
instance, to the third stage, and were put into one finished up to the
sixth stage, so that much of its work was already done for it, far from
deriving any benefit from this, it was much embarrassed, and, in order
to complete its hammock, seemed forced to start from the third stage,
where it had left off, and thus tried to complete the already finished
work.

If we suppose any habitual action to become inherited--and it can be
shown that this does sometimes happen--then the resemblance between what
originally was a habit and an instinct becomes so close as not to be
distinguished. If Mozart, instead of playing the pianoforte at three
years old with wonderfully little practice, had played a tune with no
practice at all, be might truly be said to have done so instinctively.
But it would be a serious error to suppose that the greater number
of instincts have been acquired by habit in one generation, and then
transmitted by inheritance to succeeding generations. It can be clearly
shown that the most wonderful instincts with which we are acquainted,
namely, those of the hive-bee and of many ants, could not possibly have
been acquired by habit.

It will be universally admitted that instincts are as important as
corporeal structures for the welfare of each species, under its present
conditions of life. Under changed conditions of life, it is at least
possible that slight modifications of instinct might be profitable to a
species; and if it can be shown that instincts do vary ever so little,
then I can see no difficulty in natural selection preserving and
continually accumulating variations of instinct to any extent that was
profitable. It is thus, as I believe, that all the most complex and
wonderful instincts have originated. As modifications of corporeal
structure arise from, and are increased by, use or habit, and are
diminished or lost by disuse, so I do not doubt it has been with
instincts. But I believe that the effects of habit are in many cases of
subordinate importance to the effects of the natural selection of
what may be called spontaneous variations of instincts;--that is of
variations produced by the same unknown causes which produce slight
deviations of bodily structure.

No complex instinct can possibly be produced through natural selection,
except by the slow and gradual accumulation of numerous, slight, yet
profitable, variations. Hence, as in the case of corporeal structures,
we ought to find in nature, not the actual transitional gradations by
which each complex instinct has been acquired--for these could be found
only in the lineal ancestors of each species--but we ought to find in
the collateral lines of descent some evidence of such gradations; or
we ought at least to be able to show that gradations of some kind are
possible; and this we certainly can do. I have been surprised to find,
making allowance for the instincts of animals having been but little
observed, except in Europe and North America, and for no instinct being
known among extinct species, how very generally gradations, leading to
the most complex instincts, can be discovered. Changes of instinct may
sometimes be facilitated by the same species having different instincts
at different periods of life, or at different seasons of the year, or
when placed under different circumstances, etc.; in which case either
the one or the other instinct might be preserved by natural selection.
And such instances of diversity of instinct in the same species can be
shown to occur in nature.

Again, as in the case of corporeal structure, and conformably to my
theory, the instinct of each species is good for itself, but has never,
as far as we can judge, been produced for the exclusive good of others.
One of the strongest instances of an animal apparently performing an
action for the sole good of another, with which I am acquainted, is that
of aphides voluntarily yielding, as was first observed by Huber, their
sweet excretion to ants: that they do so voluntarily, the following
facts show. I removed all the ants from a group of about a dozen aphides
on a dock-plant, and prevented their attendance during several hours.
After this interval, I felt sure that the aphides would want to excrete.
I watched them for some time through a lens, but not one excreted; I
then tickled and stroked them with a hair in the same manner, as well
as I could, as the ants do with their antennae; but not one excreted.
Afterwards, I allowed an ant to visit them, and it immediately seemed,
by its eager way of running about to be well aware what a rich flock it
had discovered; it then began to play with its antennae on the abdomen
first of one aphis and then of another; and each, as soon as it felt the
antennae, immediately lifted up its abdomen and excreted a limpid drop
of sweet juice, which was eagerly devoured by the ant. Even the quite
young aphides behaved in this manner, showing that the action was
instinctive, and not the result of experience. It is certain, from the
observations of Huber, that the aphides show no dislike to the ants:
if the latter be not present they are at last compelled to eject their
excretion. But as the excretion is extremely viscid, it is no doubt a
convenience to the aphides to have it removed; therefore probably they
do not excrete solely for the good of the ants. Although there is no
evidence that any animal performs an action for the exclusive good of
another species, yet each tries to take advantage of the instincts of
others, as each takes advantage of the weaker bodily structure of other
species. So again certain instincts cannot be considered as absolutely
perfect; but as details on this and other such points are not
indispensable, they may be here passed over.

As some degree of variation in instincts under a state of nature, and
the inheritance of such variations, are indispensable for the action of
natural selection, as many instances as possible ought to be given; but
want of space prevents me. I can only assert that instincts certainly
do vary--for instance, the migratory instinct, both in extent and
direction, and in its total loss. So it is with the nests of birds,
which vary partly in dependence on the situations chosen, and on the
nature and temperature of the country inhabited, but often from causes
wholly unknown to us. Audubon has given several remarkable cases
of differences in the nests of the same species in the northern and
southern United States. Why, it has been asked, if instinct be variable,
has it not granted to the bee "the ability to use some other material
when wax was deficient?" But what other natural material could bees
use? They will work, as I have seen, with wax hardened with vermilion
or softened with lard. Andrew Knight observed that his bees, instead of
laboriously collecting propolis, used a cement of wax and turpentine,
with which he had covered decorticated trees. It has lately been shown
that bees, instead of searching for pollen, will gladly use a very
different substance, namely, oatmeal. Fear of any particular enemy is
certainly an instinctive quality, as may be seen in nestling birds,
though it is strengthened by experience, and by the sight of fear of the
same enemy in other animals. The fear of man is slowly acquired, as
I have elsewhere shown, by the various animals which inhabit desert
islands; and we see an instance of this, even in England, in the greater
wildness of all our large birds in comparison with our small birds;
for the large birds have been most persecuted by man. We may safely
attribute the greater wildness of our large birds to this cause; for in
uninhabited islands large birds are not more fearful than small; and the
magpie, so wary in England, is tame in Norway, as is the hooded crow in
Egypt.

That the mental qualities of animals of the same kind, born in a state
of nature, vary much, could be shown by many facts. Several cases could
also be adduced of occasional and strange habits in wild animals, which,
if advantageous to the species, might have given rise, through natural
selection, to new instincts. But I am well aware that these general
statements, without the facts in detail, can produce but a feeble effect
on the reader's mind. I can only repeat my assurance, that I do not
speak without good evidence.

INHERITED CHANGES OF HABIT OR INSTINCT IN DOMESTICATED ANIMALS.

The possibility, or even probability, of inherited variations
of instinct in a state of nature will be strengthened by briefly
considering a few cases under domestication. We shall thus be enabled
to see the part which habit and the selection of so-called spontaneous
variations have played in modifying the mental qualities of our domestic
animals. It is notorious how much domestic animals vary in their mental
qualities. With cats, for instance, one naturally takes to catching
rats, and another mice, and these tendencies are known to be inherited.
One cat, according to Mr. St. John, always brought home game birds,
another hares or rabbits, and another hunted on marshy ground and almost
nightly caught woodcocks or snipes. A number of curious and authentic
instances could be given of various shades of disposition and taste, and
likewise of the oddest tricks, associated with certain frames of mind or
periods of time. But let us look to the familiar case of the breeds
of dogs: it cannot be doubted that young pointers (I have myself seen
striking instances) will sometimes point and even back other dogs the
very first time that they are taken out; retrieving is certainly in some
degree inherited by retrievers; and a tendency to run round, instead of
at, a flock of sheep, by shepherd-dogs. I cannot see that these actions,
performed without experience by the young, and in nearly the same manner
by each individual, performed with eager delight by each breed, and
without the end being known--for the young pointer can no more know that
he points to aid his master, than the white butterfly knows why she lays
her eggs on the leaf of the cabbage--I cannot see that these actions
differ essentially from true instincts. If we were to behold one kind
of wolf, when young and without any training, as soon as it scented its
prey, stand motionless like a statue, and then slowly crawl forward with
a peculiar gait; and another kind of wolf rushing round, instead of at,
a herd of deer, and driving them to a distant point, we should assuredly
call these actions instinctive. Domestic instincts, as they may be
called, are certainly far less fixed than natural instincts; but
they have been acted on by far less rigorous selection, and have
been transmitted for an incomparably shorter period, under less fixed
conditions of life.

How strongly these domestic instincts, habits, and dispositions are
inherited, and how curiously they become mingled, is well shown when
different breeds of dogs are crossed. Thus it is known that a cross with
a bull-dog has affected for many generations the courage and obstinacy
of greyhounds; and a cross with a greyhound has given to a whole family
of shepherd-dogs a tendency to hunt hares. These domestic instincts,
when thus tested by crossing, resemble natural instincts, which in a
like manner become curiously blended together, and for a long period
exhibit traces of the instincts of either parent: for example, Le Roy
describes a dog, whose great-grandfather was a wolf, and this dog
showed a trace of its wild parentage only in one way, by not coming in a
straight line to his master, when called.

Domestic instincts are sometimes spoken of as actions which have become
inherited solely from long-continued and compulsory habit, but this is
not true. No one would ever have thought of teaching, or probably could
have taught, the tumbler-pigeon to tumble--an action which, as I have
witnessed, is performed by young birds, that have never seen a pigeon
tumble. We may believe that some one pigeon showed a slight tendency to
this strange habit, and that the long-continued selection of the best
individuals in successive generations made tumblers what they now are;
and near Glasgow there are house-tumblers, as I hear from Mr. Brent,
which cannot fly eighteen inches high without going head over heels. It
may be doubted whether any one would have thought of training a dog to
point, had not some one dog naturally shown a tendency in this line; and
this is known occasionally to happen, as I once saw, in a pure terrier:
the act of pointing is probably, as many have thought, only the
exaggerated pause of an animal preparing to spring on its prey. When the
first tendency to point was once displayed, methodical selection and the
inherited effects of compulsory training in each successive generation
would soon complete the work; and unconscious selection is still in
progress, as each man tries to procure, without intending to improve the
breed, dogs which stand and hunt best. On the other hand, habit alone
in some cases has sufficed; hardly any animal is more difficult to tame
than the young of the wild rabbit; scarcely any animal is tamer than the
young of the tame rabbit; but I can hardly suppose that domestic rabbits
have often been selected for tameness alone; so that we must attribute
at least the greater part of the inherited change from extreme wildness
to extreme tameness, to habit and long-continued close confinement.

Natural instincts are lost under domestication: a remarkable instance of
this is seen in those breeds of fowls which very rarely or never become
"broody," that is, never wish to sit on their eggs. Familiarity alone
prevents our seeing how largely and how permanently the minds of our
domestic animals have been modified. It is scarcely possible to doubt
that the love of man has become instinctive in the dog. All wolves,
foxes, jackals and species of the cat genus, when kept tame, are most
eager to attack poultry, sheep and pigs; and this tendency has been
found incurable in dogs which have been brought home as puppies from
countries such as Tierra del Fuego and Australia, where the savages do
not keep these domestic animals. How rarely, on the other hand, do
our civilised dogs, even when quite young, require to be taught not to
attack poultry, sheep, and pigs! No doubt they occasionally do make an
attack, and are then beaten; and if not cured, they are destroyed;
so that habit and some degree of selection have probably concurred in
civilising by inheritance our dogs. On the other hand, young chickens
have lost wholly by habit, that fear of the dog and cat which no doubt
was originally instinctive in them, for I am informed by Captain Hutton
that the young chickens of the parent stock, the Gallus bankiva, when
reared in India under a hen, are at first excessively wild. So it is
with young pheasants reared in England under a hen. It is not that
chickens have lost all fear, but fear only of dogs and cats, for if
the hen gives the danger chuckle they will run (more especially young
turkeys) from under her and conceal themselves in the surrounding grass
or thickets; and this is evidently done for the instinctive purpose of
allowing, as we see in wild ground-birds, their mother to fly away.
But this instinct retained by our chickens has become useless under
domestication, for the mother-hen has almost lost by disuse the power of
flight.

Hence, we may conclude that under domestication instincts have been
acquired and natural instincts have been lost, partly by habit and
partly by man selecting and accumulating, during successive generations,
peculiar mental habits and actions, which at first appeared from what we
must in our ignorance call an accident. In some cases compulsory habit
alone has sufficed to produce inherited mental changes; in other cases
compulsory habit has done nothing, and all has been the result of
selection, pursued both methodically and unconsciously; but in most
cases habit and selection have probably concurred.

SPECIAL INSTINCTS.

We shall, perhaps, best understand how instincts in a state of nature
have become modified by selection by considering a few cases. I will
select only three, namely, the instinct which leads the cuckoo to lay
her eggs in other birds' nests; the slave-making instinct of certain
ants; and the cell-making power of the hive-bee: these two latter
instincts have generally and justly been ranked by naturalists as the
most wonderful of all known instincts.

INSTINCTS OF THE CUCKOO.

It is supposed by some naturalists that the more immediate cause of
the instinct of the cuckoo is that she lays her eggs, not daily, but
at intervals of two or three days; so that, if she were to make her own
nest and sit on her own eggs, those first laid would have to be left
for some time unincubated or there would be eggs and young birds of
different ages in the same nest. If this were the case the process of
laying and hatching might be inconveniently long, more especially as
she migrates at a very early period; and the first hatched young would
probably have to be fed by the male alone. But the American cuckoo is
in this predicament, for she makes her own nest and has eggs and young
successively hatched, all at the same time. It has been both asserted
and denied that the American cuckoo occasionally lays her eggs in other
birds' nests; but I have lately heard from Dr. Merrill, of Iowa, that he
once found in Illinois a young cuckoo, together with a young jay in the
nest of a blue jay (Garrulus cristatus); and as both were nearly full
feathered, there could be no mistake in their identification. I could
also give several instances of various birds which have been known
occasionally to lay their eggs in other birds' nests. Now let us suppose
that the ancient progenitor of our European cuckoo had the habits of the
American cuckoo, and that she occasionally laid an egg in another bird's
nest. If the old bird profited by this occasional habit through being
enabled to emigrate earlier or through any other cause; or if the
young were made more vigorous by advantage being taken of the mistaken
instinct of another species than when reared by their own mother,
encumbered as she could hardly fail to be by having eggs and young of
different ages at the same time, then the old birds or the fostered
young would gain an advantage. And analogy would lead us to believe
that the young thus reared would be apt to follow by inheritance the
occasional and aberrant habit of their mother, and in their turn
would be apt to lay their eggs in other birds' nests, and thus be
more successful in rearing their young. By a continued process of this
nature, I believe that the strange instinct of our cuckoo has been
generated. It has, also recently been ascertained on sufficient
evidence, by Adolf Muller, that the cuckoo occasionally lays her eggs
on the bare ground, sits on them and feeds her young. This rare event
is probably a case of reversion to the long-lost, aboriginal instinct of
nidification.

It has been objected that I have not noticed other related instincts
and adaptations of structure in the cuckoo, which are spoken of as
necessarily co-ordinated. But in all cases, speculation on an instinct
known to us only in a single species, is useless, for we have hitherto
had no facts to guide us. Until recently the instincts of the European
and of the non-parasitic American cuckoo alone were known; now, owing
to Mr. Ramsay's observations, we have learned something about three
Australian species, which lay their eggs in other birds' nests. The
chief points to be referred to are three: first, that the common cuckoo,
with rare exceptions, lays only one egg in a nest, so that the large and
voracious young bird receives ample food. Secondly, that the eggs are
remarkably small, not exceeding those of the skylark--a bird about
one-fourth as large as the cuckoo. That the small size of the egg is a
real case of adaptation we may infer from the fact of the mon-parasitic
American cuckoo laying full-sized eggs. Thirdly, that the young cuckoo,
soon after birth, has the instinct, the strength and a properly shaped
back for ejecting its foster-brothers, which then perish from cold and
hunger. This has been boldly called a beneficent arrangement, in
order that the young cuckoo may get sufficient food, and that its
foster-brothers may perish before they had acquired much feeling!

Turning now to the Australian species: though these birds generally lay
only one egg in a nest, it is not rare to find two and even three eggs
in the same nest. In the bronze cuckoo the eggs vary greatly in size,
from eight to ten lines in length. Now, if it had been of an advantage
to this species to have laid eggs even smaller than those now laid, so
as to have deceived certain foster-parents, or, as is more probable, to
have been hatched within a shorter period (for it is asserted that
there is a relation between the size of eggs and the period of their
incubation), then there is no difficulty in believing that a race or
species might have been formed which would have laid smaller and smaller
eggs; for these would have been more safely hatched and reared. Mr.
Ramsay remarks that two of the Australian cuckoos, when they lay their
eggs in an open nest, manifest a decided preference for nests containing
eggs similar in colour to their own. The European species apparently
manifests some tendency towards a similar instinct, but not rarely
departs from it, as is shown by her laying her dull and pale-coloured
eggs in the nest of the hedge-warbler with bright greenish-blue eggs.
Had our cuckoo invariably displayed the above instinct, it would
assuredly have been added to those which it is assumed must all have
been acquired together. The eggs of the Australian bronze cuckoo vary,
according to Mr. Ramsay, to an extraordinary degree in colour; so
that in this respect, as well as in size, natural selection might have
secured and fixed any advantageous variation.

In the case of the European cuckoo, the offspring of the foster-parents
are commonly ejected from the nest within three days after the cuckoo is
hatched; and as the latter at this age is in a most helpless condition,
Mr. Gould was formerly inclined to believe that the act of ejection was
performed by the foster-parents themselves. But he has now received a
trustworthy account of a young cuckoo which was actually seen, while
still blind and not able even to hold up its own head, in the act of
ejecting its foster-brothers. One of these was replaced in the nest by
the observer, and was again thrown out. With respect to the means by
which this strange and odious instinct was acquired, if it were of great
importance for the young cuckoo, as is probably the case, to receive as
much food as possible soon after birth, I can see no special difficulty
in its having gradually acquired, during successive generations, the
blind desire, the strength, and structure necessary for the work of
ejection; for those cuckoos which had such habits and structure best
developed would be the most securely reared. The first step towards the
acquisition of the proper instinct might have been mere unintentional
restlessness on the part of the young bird, when somewhat advanced
in age and strength; the habit having been afterwards improved, and
transmitted to an earlier age. I can see no more difficulty in this than
in the unhatched young of other birds acquiring the instinct to break
through their own shells; or than in young snakes acquiring in their
upper jaws, as Owen has remarked, a transitory sharp tooth for cutting
through the tough egg-shell. For if each part is liable to individual
variations at all ages, and the variations tend to be inherited at
a corresponding or earlier age--propositions which cannot be
disputed--then the instincts and structure of the young could be slowly
modified as surely as those of the adult; and both cases must stand or
fall together with the whole theory of natural selection.

Some species of Molothrus, a widely distinct genus of American birds,
allied to our starlings, have parasitic habits like those of the cuckoo;
and the species present an interesting gradation in the perfection
of their instincts. The sexes of Molothrus badius are stated by an
excellent observer, Mr. Hudson, sometimes to live promiscuously together
in flocks, and sometimes to pair. They either build a nest of their own
or seize on one belonging to some other bird, occasionally throwing out
the nestlings of the stranger. They either lay their eggs in the nest
thus appropriated, or oddly enough build one for themselves on the top
of it. They usually sit on their own eggs and rear their own young; but
Mr. Hudson says it is probable that they are occasionally parasitic, for
he has seen the young of this species following old birds of a distinct
kind and clamouring to be fed by them. The parasitic habits of another
species of Molothrus, the M. bonariensis, are much more highly developed
than those of the last, but are still far from perfect. This bird, as
far as it is known, invariably lays its eggs in the nests of strangers;
but it is remarkable that several together sometimes commence to build
an irregular untidy nest of their own, placed in singular ill-adapted
situations, as on the leaves of a large thistle. They never, however, as
far as Mr. Hudson has ascertained, complete a nest for themselves. They
often lay so many eggs--from fifteen to twenty--in the same foster-nest,
that few or none can possibly be hatched. They have, moreover, the
extraordinary habit of pecking holes in the eggs, whether of their own
species or of their foster parents, which they find in the appropriated
nests. They drop also many eggs on the bare ground, which are thus
wasted. A third species, the M. pecoris of North America, has acquired
instincts as perfect as those of the cuckoo, for it never lays more than
one egg in a foster-nest, so that the young bird is securely reared. Mr.
Hudson is a strong disbeliever in evolution, but he appears to have been
so much struck by the imperfect instincts of the Molothrus bonariensis
that he quotes my words, and asks, "Must we consider these habits, not
as especially endowed or created instincts, but as small consequences of
one general law, namely, transition?"

Various birds, as has already been remarked, occasionally lay their eggs
in the nests of other birds. This habit is not very uncommon with the
Gallinaceae, and throws some light on the singular instinct of the
ostrich. In this family several hen birds unite and lay first a few eggs
in one nest and then in another; and these are hatched by the males.
This instinct may probably be accounted for by the fact of the hens
laying a large number of eggs, but, as with the cuckoo, at intervals of
two or three days. The instinct, however, of the American ostrich, as
in the case of the Molothrus bonariensis, has not as yet been perfected;
for a surprising number of eggs lie strewed over the plains, so that in
one day's hunting I picked up no less than twenty lost and wasted eggs.

Many bees are parasitic, and regularly lay their eggs in the nests
of other kinds of bees. This case is more remarkable than that of the
cuckoo; for these bees have not only had their instincts but their
structure modified in accordance with their parasitic habits; for they
do not possess the pollen-collecting apparatus which would have been
indispensable if they had stored up food for their own young. Some
species of Sphegidae (wasp-like insects) are likewise parasitic; and
M. Fabre has lately shown good reason for believing that, although
the Tachytes nigra generally makes its own burrow and stores it with
paralysed prey for its own larvae, yet that, when this insect finds a
burrow already made and stored by another sphex, it takes advantage of
the prize, and becomes for the occasion parasitic. In this case, as
with that of the Molothrus or cuckoo, I can see no difficulty in natural
selection making an occasional habit permanent, if of advantage to the
species, and if the insect whose nest and stored food are feloniously
appropriated, be not thus exterminated.

SLAVE-MAKING INSTINCT.

This remarkable instinct was first discovered in the Formica (Polyerges)
rufescens by Pierre Huber, a better observer even than his celebrated
father. This ant is absolutely dependent on its slaves; without their
aid, the species would certainly become extinct in a single year. The
males and fertile females do no work of any kind, and the workers or
sterile females, though most energetic and courageous in capturing
slaves, do no other work. They are incapable of making their own nests,
or of feeding their own larvae. When the old nest is found inconvenient,
and they have to migrate, it is the slaves which determine the
migration, and actually carry their masters in their jaws. So utterly
helpless are the masters, that when Huber shut up thirty of them without
a slave, but with plenty of the food which they like best, and with
their larvae and pupae to stimulate them to work, they did nothing; they
could not even feed themselves, and many perished of hunger. Huber then
introduced a single slave (F. fusca), and she instantly set to work, fed
and saved the survivors; made some cells and tended the larvae, and
put all to rights. What can be more extraordinary than these
well-ascertained facts? If we had not known of any other slave-making
ant, it would have been hopeless to speculate how so wonderful an
instinct could have been perfected.

Another species, Formica sanguinea, was likewise first discovered by P.
Huber to be a slave-making ant. This species is found in the southern
parts of England, and its habits have been attended to by Mr. F. Smith,
of the British Museum, to whom I am much indebted for information on
this and other subjects. Although fully trusting to the statements of
Huber and Mr. Smith, I tried to approach the subject in a sceptical
frame of mind, as any one may well be excused for doubting the existence
of so extraordinary an instinct as that of making slaves. Hence, I
will give the observations which I made in some little detail. I opened
fourteen nests of F. sanguinea, and found a few slaves in all. Males and
fertile females of the slave-species (F. fusca) are found only in their
own proper communities, and have never been observed in the nests of F.
sanguinea. The slaves are black and not above half the size of their
red masters, so that the contrast in their appearance is great. When the
nest is slightly disturbed, the slaves occasionally come out, and like
their masters are much agitated and defend the nest: when the nest is
much disturbed, and the larvae and pupae are exposed, the slaves work
energetically together with their masters in carrying them away to a
place of safety. Hence, it is clear that the slaves feel quite at home.
During the months of June and July, on three successive years, I watched
for many hours several nests in Surrey and Sussex, and never saw a slave
either leave or enter a nest. As, during these months, the slaves are
very few in number, I thought that they might behave differently when
more numerous; but Mr. Smith informs me that he has watched the nests at
various hours during May, June and August, both in Surrey and Hampshire,
and has never seen the slaves, though present in large numbers in
August, either leave or enter the nest. Hence, he considers them as
strictly household slaves. The masters, on the other hand, may be
constantly seen bringing in materials for the nest, and food of all
kinds. During the year 1860, however, in the month of July, I came
across a community with an unusually large stock of slaves, and I
observed a few slaves mingled with their masters leaving the nest, and
marching along the same road to a tall Scotch-fir tree, twenty-five
yards distant, which they ascended together, probably in search of
aphides or cocci. According to Huber, who had ample opportunities
for observation, the slaves in Switzerland habitually work with their
masters in making the nest, and they alone open and close the doors in
the morning and evening; and, as Huber expressly states, their principal
office is to search for aphides. This difference in the usual habits of
the masters and slaves in the two countries, probably depends merely
on the slaves being captured in greater numbers in Switzerland than in
England.

One day I fortunately witnessed a migration of F. sanguinea from one
nest to another, and it was a most interesting spectacle to behold the
masters carefully carrying their slaves in their jaws instead of
being carried by them, as in the case of F. rufescens. Another day my
attention was struck by about a score of the slave-makers haunting the
same spot, and evidently not in search of food; they approached and were
vigorously repulsed by an independent community of the slave species (F.
fusca); sometimes as many as three of these ants clinging to the legs of
the slave-making F. sanguinea. The latter ruthlessly killed their
small opponents and carried their dead bodies as food to their nest,
twenty-nine yards distant; but they were prevented from getting any
pupae to rear as slaves. I then dug up a small parcel of the pupae of F.
fusca from another nest, and put them down on a bare spot near the place
of combat; they were eagerly seized and carried off by the tyrants, who
perhaps fancied that, after all, they had been victorious in their late
combat.

At the same time I laid on the same place a small parcel of the pupae of
another species, F. flava, with a few of these little yellow ants still
clinging to the fragments of their nest. This species is sometimes,
though rarely, made into slaves, as has been described by Mr. Smith.
Although so small a species, it is very courageous, and I have seen it
ferociously attack other ants. In one instance I found to my surprise
an independent community of F. flava under a stone beneath a nest of the
slave-making F. sanguinea; and when I had accidentally disturbed both
nests, the little ants attacked their big neighbours with surprising
courage. Now I was curious to ascertain whether F. sanguinea could
distinguish the pupae of F. fusca, which they habitually make into
slaves, from those of the little and furious F. flava, which they rarely
capture, and it was evident that they did at once distinguish them;
for we have seen that they eagerly and instantly seized the pupae of F.
fusca, whereas they were much terrified when they came across the pupae,
or even the earth from the nest, of F. flava, and quickly ran away; but
in about a quarter of an hour, shortly after all the little yellow ants
had crawled away, they took heart and carried off the pupae.

One evening I visited another community of F. sanguinea, and found a
number of these ants returning home and entering their nests, carrying
the dead bodies of F. fusca (showing that it was not a migration) and
numerous pupae. I traced a long file of ants burdened with booty, for
about forty yards back, to a very thick clump of heath, whence I saw the
last individual of F. sanguinea emerge, carrying a pupa; but I was not
able to find the desolated nest in the thick heath. The nest, however,
must have been close at hand, for two or three individuals of F. fusca
were rushing about in the greatest agitation, and one was perched
motionless with its own pupa in its mouth on the top of a spray of
heath, an image of despair over its ravaged home.

Such are the facts, though they did not need confirmation by me, in
regard to the wonderful instinct of making slaves. Let it be observed
what a contrast the instinctive habits of F. sanguinea present with
those of the continental F. rufescens. The latter does not build its own
nest, does not determine its own migrations, does not collect food
for itself or its young, and cannot even feed itself: it is absolutely
dependent on its numerous slaves. Formica sanguinea, on the other
hand, possesses much fewer slaves, and in the early part of the summer
extremely few. The masters determine when and where a new nest shall
be formed, and when they migrate, the masters carry the slaves. Both in
Switzerland and England the slaves seem to have the exclusive care of
the larvae, and the masters alone go on slave-making expeditions. In
Switzerland the slaves and masters work together, making and bringing
materials for the nest: both, but chiefly the slaves, tend and milk
as it may be called, their aphides; and thus both collect food for
the community. In England the masters alone usually leave the nest to
collect building materials and food for themselves, their slaves and
larvae. So that the masters in this country receive much less service
from their slaves than they do in Switzerland.

By what steps the instinct of F. sanguinea originated I will not pretend
to conjecture. But as ants which are not slave-makers, will, as I have
seen, carry off pupae of other species, if scattered near their nests,
it is possible that such pupae originally stored as food might become
developed; and the foreign ants thus unintentionally reared would then
follow their proper instincts, and do what work they could. If their
presence proved useful to the species which had seized them--if it were
more advantageous to this species, to capture workers than to procreate
them--the habit of collecting pupae, originally for food, might by
natural selection be strengthened and rendered permanent for the
very different purpose of raising slaves. When the instinct was once
acquired, if carried out to a much less extent even than in our British
F. sanguinea, which, as we have seen, is less aided by its slaves than
the same species in Switzerland, natural selection might increase and
modify the instinct--always supposing each modification to be of use to
the species--until an ant was formed as abjectly dependent on its slaves
as is the Formica rufescens.

CELL-MAKING INSTINCT OF THE HIVE-BEE.

I will not here enter on minute details on this subject, but will merely
give an outline of the conclusions at which I have arrived. He must be
a dull man who can examine the exquisite structure of a comb, so
beautifully adapted to its end, without enthusiastic admiration. We
hear from mathematicians that bees have practically solved a recondite
problem, and have made their cells of the proper shape to hold the
greatest possible amount of honey, with the least possible consumption
of precious wax in their construction. It has been remarked that a
skilful workman, with fitting tools and measures, would find it very
difficult to make cells of wax of the true form, though this is effected
by a crowd of bees working in a dark hive. Granting whatever instincts
you please, it seems at first quite inconceivable how they can make
all the necessary angles and planes, or even perceive when they are
correctly made. But the difficulty is not nearly so great as at first
appears: all this beautiful work can be shown, I think, to follow from a
few simple instincts.

I was led to investigate this subject by Mr. Waterhouse, who has shown
that the form of the cell stands in close relation to the presence of
adjoining cells; and the following view may, perhaps, be considered only
as a modification of his theory. Let us look to the great principle of
gradation, and see whether Nature does not reveal to us her method of
work. At one end of a short series we have humble-bees, which use their
old cocoons to hold honey, sometimes adding to them short tubes of wax,
and likewise making separate and very irregular rounded cells of wax. At
the other end of the series we have the cells of the hive-bee, placed in
a double layer: each cell, as is well known, is an hexagonal prism,
with the basal edges of its six sides bevelled so as to join an inverted
pyramid, of three rhombs. These rhombs have certain angles, and the
three which form the pyramidal base of a single cell on one side of the
comb, enter into the composition of the bases of three adjoining cells
on the opposite side. In the series between the extreme perfection of
the cells of the hive-bee and the simplicity of those of the humble-bee,
we have the cells of the Mexican Melipona domestica, carefully described
and figured by Pierre Huber. The Melipona itself is intermediate in
structure between the hive and humble bee, but more nearly related to
the latter: it forms a nearly regular waxen comb of cylindrical cells,
in which the young are hatched, and, in addition, some large cells of
wax for holding honey. These latter cells are nearly spherical and of
nearly equal sizes, and are aggregated into an irregular mass. But the
important point to notice is, that these cells are always made at that
degree of nearness to each other that they would have intersected or
broken into each other if the spheres had been completed; but this is
never permitted, the bees building perfectly flat walls of wax between
the spheres which thus tend to intersect. Hence, each cell consists of
an outer spherical portion, and of two, three, or more flat surfaces,
according as the cell adjoins two, three or more other cells. When one
cell rests on three other cells, which, from the spheres being nearly
of the same size, is very frequently and necessarily the case, the three
flat surfaces are united into a pyramid; and this pyramid, as Huber has
remarked, is manifestly a gross imitation of the three-sided pyramidal
base of the cell of the hive-bee. As in the cells of the hive-bee, so
here, the three plane surfaces in any one cell necessarily enter into
the construction of three adjoining cells. It is obvious that the
Melipona saves wax, and what is more important, labour, by this manner
of building; for the flat walls between the adjoining cells are not
double, but are of the same thickness as the outer spherical portions,
and yet each flat portion forms a part of two cells.

Reflecting on this case, it occurred to me that if the Melipona had made
its spheres at some given distance from each other, and had made them of
equal sizes and had arranged them symmetrically in a double layer,
the resulting structure would have been as perfect as the comb of the
hive-bee. Accordingly I wrote to Professor Miller, of Cambridge, and
this geometer has kindly read over the following statement, drawn up
from his information, and tells me that it is strictly correct:--

If a number of equal spheres be described with their centres placed in
two parallel layers; with the centre of each sphere at the distance of
radius x sqrt(2) or radius x 1.41421 (or at some lesser distance), from
the centres of the six surrounding spheres in the same layer; and at the
same distance from the centres of the adjoining spheres in the other and
parallel layer; then, if planes of intersection between the several
spheres in both layers be formed, there will result a double layer of
hexagonal prisms united together by pyramidal bases formed of three
rhombs; and the rhombs and the sides of the hexagonal prisms will have
every angle identically the same with the best measurements which have
been made of the cells of the hive-bee. But I hear from Professor Wyman,
who has made numerous careful measurements, that the accuracy of the
workmanship of the bee has been greatly exaggerated; so much so, that
whatever the typical form of the cell may be, it is rarely, if ever,
realised.

Hence we may safely conclude that, if we could slightly modify the
instincts already possessed by the Melipona, and in themselves not very
wonderful, this bee would make a structure as wonderfully perfect as
that of the hive-bee. We must suppose the Melipona to have the power of
forming her cells truly spherical, and of equal sizes; and this would
not be very surprising, seeing that she already does so to a certain
extent, and seeing what perfectly cylindrical burrows many insects make
in wood, apparently by turning round on a fixed point. We must suppose
the Melipona to arrange her cells in level layers, as she already does
her cylindrical cells; and we must further suppose, and this is the
greatest difficulty, that she can somehow judge accurately at what
distance to stand from her fellow-labourers when several are making
their spheres; but she is already so far enabled to judge of distance,
that she always describes her spheres so as to intersect to a certain
extent; and then she unites the points of intersection by perfectly flat
surfaces. By such modifications of instincts which in themselves are not
very wonderful--hardly more wonderful than those which guide a bird to
make its nest--I believe that the hive-bee has acquired, through natural
selection, her inimitable architectural powers.

But this theory can be tested by experiment. Following the example of
Mr. Tegetmeier, I separated two combs, and put between them a long,
thick, rectangular strip of wax: the bees instantly began to excavate
minute circular pits in it; and as they deepened these little pits, they
made them wider and wider until they were converted into shallow basins,
appearing to the eye perfectly true or parts of a sphere, and of
about the diameter of a cell. It was most interesting to observe that,
wherever several bees had begun to excavate these basins near together,
they had begun their work at such a distance from each other that by
the time the basins had acquired the above stated width (i.e. about the
width of an ordinary cell), and were in depth about one sixth of the
diameter of the sphere of which they formed a part, the rims of the
basins intersected or broke into each other. As soon as this occurred,
the bees ceased to excavate, and began to build up flat walls of wax
on the lines of intersection between the basins, so that each hexagonal
prism was built upon the scalloped edge of a smooth basin, instead of on
the straight edges of a three-sided pyramid as in the case of ordinary
cells.

I then put into the hive, instead of a thick, rectangular piece of wax,
a thin and narrow, knife-edged ridge, coloured with vermilion. The bees
instantly began on both sides to excavate little basins near to each
other, in the same way as before; but the ridge of wax was so thin, that
the bottoms of the basins, if they had been excavated to the same depth
as in the former experiment, would have broken into each other from the
opposite sides. The bees, however, did not suffer this to happen, and
they stopped their excavations in due time; so that the basins, as soon
as they had been a little deepened, came to have flat bases; and these
flat bases, formed by thin little plates of the vermilion wax left
ungnawed, were situated, as far as the eye could judge, exactly along
the planes of imaginary intersection between the basins on the opposite
side of the ridge of wax. In some parts, only small portions, in other
parts, large portions of a rhombic plate were thus left between the
opposed basins, but the work, from the unnatural state of things, had
not been neatly performed. The bees must have worked at very nearly the
same rate in circularly gnawing away and deepening the basins on both
sides of the ridge of vermilion wax, in order to have thus succeeded in
leaving flat plates between the basins, by stopping work at the planes
of intersection.

Considering how flexible thin wax is, I do not see that there is any
difficulty in the bees, whilst at work on the two sides of a strip
of wax, perceiving when they have gnawed the wax away to the proper
thinness, and then stopping their work. In ordinary combs it has
appeared to me that the bees do not always succeed in working at exactly
the same rate from the opposite sides; for I have noticed half-completed
rhombs at the base of a just-commenced cell, which were slightly concave
on one side, where I suppose that the bees had excavated too quickly,
and convex on the opposed side where the bees had worked less quickly.
In one well-marked instance, I put the comb back into the hive, and
allowed the bees to go on working for a short time, and again examined
the cell, and I found that the rhombic plate had been completed, and had
become PERFECTLY FLAT: it was absolutely impossible, from the extreme
thinness of the little plate, that they could have effected this by
gnawing away the convex side; and I suspect that the bees in such cases
stand in the opposed cells and push and bend the ductile and warm wax
(which as I have tried is easily done) into its proper intermediate
plane, and thus flatten it.

From the experiment of the ridge of vermilion wax we can see that, if
the bees were to build for themselves a thin wall of wax, they could
make their cells of the proper shape, by standing at the proper distance
from each other, by excavating at the same rate, and by endeavouring to
make equal spherical hollows, but never allowing the spheres to break
into each other. Now bees, as may be clearly seen by examining the edge
of a growing comb, do make a rough, circumferential wall or rim all
round the comb; and they gnaw this away from the opposite sides, always
working circularly as they deepen each cell. They do not make the whole
three-sided pyramidal base of any one cell at the same time, but only
that one rhombic plate which stands on the extreme growing margin, or
the two plates, as the case may be; and they never complete the upper
edges of the rhombic plates, until the hexagonal walls are commenced.
Some of these statements differ from those made by the justly celebrated
elder Huber, but I am convinced of their accuracy; and if I had space, I
could show that they are conformable with my theory.

Huber's statement, that the very first cell is excavated out of a little
parallel-sided wall of wax, is not, as far as I have seen, strictly
correct; the first commencement having always been a little hood of
wax; but I will not here enter on details. We see how important a part
excavation plays in the construction of the cells; but it would be a
great error to suppose that the bees cannot build up a rough wall of wax
in the proper position--that is, along the plane of intersection between
two adjoining spheres. I have several specimens showing clearly that
they can do this. Even in the rude circumferential rim or wall of wax
round a growing comb, flexures may sometimes be observed, corresponding
in position to the planes of the rhombic basal plates of future cells.
But the rough wall of wax has in every case to be finished off, by being
largely gnawed away on both sides. The manner in which the bees build is
curious; they always make the first rough wall from ten to twenty times
thicker than the excessively thin finished wall of the cell, which will
ultimately be left. We shall understand how they work, by supposing
masons first to pile up a broad ridge of cement, and then to begin
cutting it away equally on both sides near the ground, till a smooth,
very thin wall is left in the middle; the masons always piling up the
cut-away cement, and adding fresh cement on the summit of the ridge. We
shall thus have a thin wall steadily growing upward but always crowned
by a gigantic coping. From all the cells, both those just commenced and
those completed, being thus crowned by a strong coping of wax, the
bees can cluster and crawl over the comb without injuring the delicate
hexagonal walls. These walls, as Professor Miller has kindly ascertained
for me, vary greatly in thickness; being, on an average of twelve
measurements made near the border of the comb, 1/352 of an inch in
thickness; whereas the basal rhomboidal plates are thicker, nearly in
the proportion of three to two, having a mean thickness, from twenty-one
measurements, of 1/229 of an inch. By the above singular manner of
building, strength is continually given to the comb, with the utmost
ultimate economy of wax.

It seems at first to add to the difficulty of understanding how the
cells are made, that a multitude of bees all work together; one bee
after working a short time at one cell going to another, so that, as
Huber has stated, a score of individuals work even at the commencement
of the first cell. I was able practically to show this fact, by covering
the edges of the hexagonal walls of a single cell, or the extreme margin
of the circumferential rim of a growing comb, with an extremely thin
layer of melted vermilion wax; and I invariably found that the colour
was most delicately diffused by the bees--as delicately as a painter
could have done it with his brush--by atoms of the coloured wax having
been taken from the spot on which it had been placed, and worked into
the growing edges of the cells all round. The work of construction seems
to be a sort of balance struck between many bees, all instinctively
standing at the same relative distance from each other, all trying to
sweep equal spheres, and then building up, or leaving ungnawed, the
planes of intersection between these spheres. It was really curious to
note in cases of difficulty, as when two pieces of comb met at an angle,
how often the bees would pull down and rebuild in different ways the
same cell, sometimes recurring to a shape which they had at first
rejected.

When bees have a place on which they can stand in their proper positions
for working--for instance, on a slip of wood, placed directly under the
middle of a comb growing downwards, so that the comb has to be built
over one face of the slip--in this case the bees can lay the foundations
of one wall of a new hexagon, in its strictly proper place, projecting
beyond the other completed cells. It suffices that the bees should be
enabled to stand at their proper relative distances from each other
and from the walls of the last completed cells, and then, by striking
imaginary spheres, they can build up a wall intermediate between two
adjoining spheres; but, as far as I have seen, they never gnaw away and
finish off the angles of a cell till a large part both of that cell and
of the adjoining cells has been built. This capacity in bees of laying
down under certain circumstances a rough wall in its proper place
between two just-commenced cells, is important, as it bears on a fact,
which seems at first subversive of the foregoing theory; namely, that
the cells on the extreme margin of wasp-combs are sometimes strictly
hexagonal; but I have not space here to enter on this subject. Nor does
there seem to me any great difficulty in a single insect (as in the case
of a queen-wasp) making hexagonal cells, if she were to work alternately
on the inside and outside of two or three cells commenced at the same
time, always standing at the proper relative distance from the parts
of the cells just begun, sweeping spheres or cylinders, and building up
intermediate planes.

As natural selection acts only by the accumulation of slight
modifications of structure or instinct, each profitable to the
individual under its conditions of life, it may reasonably be asked, how
a long and graduated succession of modified architectural instincts,
all tending towards the present perfect plan of construction, could
have profited the progenitors of the hive-bee? I think the answer is not
difficult: cells constructed like those of the bee or the wasp gain in
strength, and save much in labour and space, and in the materials of
which they are constructed. With respect to the formation of wax, it is
known that bees are often hard pressed to get sufficient nectar; and
I am informed by Mr. Tegetmeier that it has been experimentally proved
that from twelve to fifteen pounds of dry sugar are consumed by a
hive of bees for the secretion of a pound of wax; so that a prodigious
quantity of fluid nectar must be collected and consumed by the bees in
a hive for the secretion of the wax necessary for the construction
of their combs. Moreover, many bees have to remain idle for many days
during the process of secretion. A large store of honey is indispensable
to support a large stock of bees during the winter; and the security
of the hive is known mainly to depend on a large number of bees being
supported. Hence the saving of wax by largely saving honey, and the
time consumed in collecting the honey, must be an important element of
success any family of bees. Of course the success of the species may
be dependent on the number of its enemies, or parasites, or on quite
distinct causes, and so be altogether independent of the quantity of
honey which the bees can collect. But let us suppose that this latter
circumstance determined, as it probably often has determined, whether
a bee allied to our humble-bees could exist in large numbers in any
country; and let us further suppose that the community lived through the
winter, and consequently required a store of honey: there can in
this case be no doubt that it would be an advantage to our imaginary
humble-bee if a slight modification of her instincts led her to make her
waxen cells near together, so as to intersect a little; for a wall in
common even to two adjoining cells would save some little labour and
wax. Hence, it would continually be more and more advantageous to our
humble-bees, if they were to make their cells more and more regular,
nearer together, and aggregated into a mass, like the cells of the
Melipona; for in this case a large part of the bounding surface of each
cell would serve to bound the adjoining cells, and much labour and wax
would be saved. Again, from the same cause, it would be advantageous to
the Melipona, if she were to make her cells closer together, and more
regular in every way than at present; for then, as we have seen, the
spherical surfaces would wholly disappear and be replaced by plane
surfaces; and the Melipona would make a comb as perfect as that of
the hive-bee. Beyond this stage of perfection in architecture, natural
selection could not lead; for the comb of the hive-bee, as far as we can
see, is absolutely perfect in economising labour and wax.

Thus, as I believe, the most wonderful of all known instincts, that
of the hive-bee, can be explained by natural selection having taken
advantage of numerous, successive, slight modifications of simpler
instincts; natural selection having, by slow degrees, more and more
perfectly led the bees to sweep equal spheres at a given distance from
each other in a double layer, and to build up and excavate the wax along
the planes of intersection. The bees, of course, no more knowing that
they swept their spheres at one particular distance from each other,
than they know what are the several angles of the hexagonal prisms and
of the basal rhombic plates; the motive power of the process of natural
selection having been the construction of cells of due strength and of
the proper size and shape for the larvae, this being effected with the
greatest possible economy of labour and wax; that individual swarm which
thus made the best cells with least labour, and least waste of honey
in the secretion of wax, having succeeded best, and having transmitted
their newly-acquired economical instincts to new swarms, which in their
turn will have had the best chance of succeeding in the struggle for
existence.

OBJECTIONS TO THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION AS APPLIED TO INSTINCTS:
NEUTER AND STERILE INSECTS.

It has been objected to the foregoing view of the origin of instincts
that "the variations of structure and of instinct must have been
simultaneous and accurately adjusted to each other, as a modification
in the one without an immediate corresponding change in the other would
have been fatal." The force of this objection rests entirely on the
assumption that the changes in the instincts and structure are abrupt.
To take as an illustration the case of the larger titmouse, (Parus
major) alluded to in a previous chapter; this bird often holds the seeds
of the yew between its feet on a branch, and hammers with its beak till
it gets at the kernel. Now what special difficulty would there be in
natural selection preserving all the slight individual variations in the
shape of the beak, which were better and better adapted to break open
the seeds, until a beak was formed, as well constructed for this purpose
as that of the nuthatch, at the same time that habit, or compulsion, or
spontaneous variations of taste, led the bird to become more and more of
a seed-eater? In this case the beak is supposed to be slowly modified
by natural selection, subsequently to, but in accordance with, slowly
changing habits or taste; but let the feet of the titmouse vary and grow
larger from correlation with the beak, or from any other unknown cause,
and it is not improbable that such larger feet would lead the bird to
climb more and more until it acquired the remarkable climbing instinct
and power of the nuthatch. In this case a gradual change of structure is
supposed to lead to changed instinctive habits. To take one more case:
few instincts are more remarkable than that which leads the swift of
the Eastern Islands to make its nest wholly of inspissated saliva. Some
birds build their nests of mud, believed to be moistened with saliva;
and one of the swifts of North America makes its nest (as I have
seen) of sticks agglutinated with saliva, and even with flakes of this
substance. Is it then very improbable that the natural selection of
individual swifts, which secreted more and more saliva, should at last
produce a species with instincts leading it to neglect other materials
and to make its nest exclusively of inspissated saliva? And so in other
cases. It must, however, be admitted that in many instances we cannot
conjecture whether it was instinct or structure which first varied.

No doubt many instincts of very difficult explanation could be opposed
to the theory of natural selection--cases, in which we cannot see how
an instinct could have originated; cases, in which no intermediate
gradations are known to exist; cases of instincts of such trifling
importance, that they could hardly have been acted on by natural
selection; cases of instincts almost identically the same in animals
so remote in the scale of nature that we cannot account for their
similarity by inheritance from a common progenitor, and consequently
must believe that they were independently acquired through natural
selection. I will not here enter on these several cases, but will
confine myself to one special difficulty, which at first appeared to
me insuperable, and actually fatal to the whole theory. I allude to
the neuters or sterile females in insect communities: for these neuters
often differ widely in instinct and in structure from both the males
and fertile females, and yet, from being sterile, they cannot propagate
their kind.

The subject well deserves to be discussed at great length, but I will
here take only a single case, that of working or sterile ants. How the
workers have been rendered sterile is a difficulty; but not much greater
than that of any other striking modification of structure; for it can
be shown that some insects and other articulate animals in a state of
nature occasionally become sterile; and if such insects had been social,
and it had been profitable to the community that a number should have
been annually born capable of work, but incapable of procreation, I can
see no especial difficulty in this having been effected through natural
selection. But I must pass over this preliminary difficulty. The great
difficulty lies in the working ants differing widely from both the males
and the fertile females in structure, as in the shape of the thorax, and
in being destitute of wings and sometimes of eyes, and in instinct. As
far as instinct alone is concerned, the wonderful difference in this
respect between the workers and the perfect females would have been
better exemplified by the hive-bee. If a working ant or other neuter
insect had been an ordinary animal, I should have unhesitatingly
assumed that all its characters had been slowly acquired through
natural selection; namely, by individuals having been born with slight
profitable modifications, which were inherited by the offspring, and
that these again varied and again were selected, and so onwards. But
with the working ant we have an insect differing greatly from its
parents, yet absolutely sterile; so that it could never have transmitted
successively acquired modifications of structure or instinct to its
progeny. It may well be asked how it is possible to reconcile this case
with the theory of natural selection?

First, let it be remembered that we have innumerable instances, both in
our domestic productions and in those in a state of nature, of all sorts
of differences of inherited structure which are correlated with certain
ages and with either sex. We have differences correlated not only with
one sex, but with that short period when the reproductive system is
active, as in the nuptial plumage of many birds, and in the hooked jaws
of the male salmon. We have even slight differences in the horns of
different breeds of cattle in relation to an artificially imperfect
state of the male sex; for oxen of certain breeds have longer horns than
the oxen of other breeds, relatively to the length of the horns in
both the bulls and cows of these same breeds. Hence, I can see no
great difficulty in any character becoming correlated with the sterile
condition of certain members of insect communities; the difficulty lies
in understanding how such correlated modifications of structure could
have been slowly accumulated by natural selection.

This difficulty, though appearing insuperable, is lessened, or, as I
believe, disappears, when it is remembered that selection may be applied
to the family, as well as to the individual, and may thus gain the
desired end. Breeders of cattle wish the flesh and fat to be well
marbled together. An animal thus characterized has been slaughtered,
but the breeder has gone with confidence to the same stock and has
succeeded. Such faith may be placed in the power of selection that a
breed of cattle, always yielding oxen with extraordinarily long horns,
could, it is probable, be formed by carefully watching which individual
bulls and cows, when matched, produced oxen with the longest horns; and
yet no one ox would ever have propagated its kind. Here is a better and
real illustration: According to M. Verlot, some varieties of the double
annual stock, from having been long and carefully selected to the right
degree, always produce a large proportion of seedlings bearing double
and quite sterile flowers, but they likewise yield some single and
fertile plants. These latter, by which alone the variety can be
propagated, may be compared with the fertile male and female ants, and
the double sterile plants with the neuters of the same community. As
with the varieties of the stock, so with social insects, selection has
been applied to the family, and not to the individual, for the sake
of gaining a serviceable end. Hence, we may conclude that slight
modifications of structure or of instinct, correlated with the sterile
condition of certain members of the community, have proved advantageous;
consequently the fertile males and females have flourished, and
transmitted to their fertile offspring a tendency to produce sterile
members with the same modifications. This process must have been
repeated many times, until that prodigious amount of difference between
the fertile and sterile females of the same species has been produced
which we see in many social insects.

But we have not as yet touched on the acme of the difficulty; namely,
the fact that the neuters of several ants differ, not only from the
fertile females and males, but from each other, sometimes to an almost
incredible degree, and are thus divided into two or even three castes.
The castes, moreover, do not generally graduate into each other, but are
perfectly well defined; being as distinct from each other as are any
two species of the same genus, or rather as any two genera of the same
family. Thus, in Eciton, there are working and soldier neuters, with
jaws and instincts extraordinarily different: in Cryptocerus, the
workers of one caste alone carry a wonderful sort of shield on their
heads, the use of which is quite unknown: in the Mexican Myrmecocystus,
the workers of one caste never leave the nest; they are fed by the
workers of another caste, and they have an enormously developed abdomen
which secretes a sort of honey, supplying the place of that excreted
by the aphides, or the domestic cattle as they may be called, which our
European ants guard and imprison.

It will indeed be thought that I have an overweening confidence in the
principle of natural selection, when I do not admit that such wonderful
and well-established facts at once annihilate the theory. In the simpler
case of neuter insects all of one caste, which, as I believe, have been
rendered different from the fertile males and females through natural
selection, we may conclude from the analogy of ordinary variations, that
the successive, slight, profitable modifications did not first arise in
all the neuters in the same nest, but in some few alone; and that by
the survival of the communities with females which produced most neuters
having the advantageous modification, all the neuters ultimately came to
be thus characterized. According to this view we ought occasionally
to find in the same nest neuter-insects, presenting gradations of
structure; and this we do find, even not rarely, considering how few
neuter-insects out of Europe have been carefully examined. Mr. F. Smith
has shown that the neuters of several British ants differ surprisingly
from each other in size and sometimes in colour; and that the extreme
forms can be linked together by individuals taken out of the same nest:
I have myself compared perfect gradations of this kind. It sometimes
happens that the larger or the smaller sized workers are the most
numerous; or that both large and small are numerous, while those of an
intermediate size are scanty in numbers. Formica flava has larger
and smaller workers, with some few of intermediate size; and, in this
species, as Mr. F. Smith has observed, the larger workers have simple
eyes (ocelli), which, though small, can be plainly distinguished,
whereas the smaller workers have their ocelli rudimentary. Having
carefully dissected several specimens of these workers, I can affirm
that the eyes are far more rudimentary in the smaller workers than can
be accounted for merely by their proportionately lesser size; and I
fully believe, though I dare not assert so positively, that the workers
of intermediate size have their ocelli in an exactly intermediate
condition. So that here we have two bodies of sterile workers in the
same nest, differing not only in size, but in their organs of vision,
yet connected by some few members in an intermediate condition. I may
digress by adding, that if the smaller workers had been the most useful
to the community, and those males and females had been continually
selected, which produced more and more of the smaller workers, until all
the workers were in this condition; we should then have had a species of
ant with neuters in nearly the same condition as those of Myrmica. For
the workers of Myrmica have not even rudiments of ocelli, though the
male and female ants of this genus have well-developed ocelli.

I may give one other case: so confidently did I expect occasionally to
find gradations of important structures between the different castes
of neuters in the same species, that I gladly availed myself of Mr. F.
Smith's offer of numerous specimens from the same nest of the driver
ant (Anomma) of West Africa. The reader will perhaps best appreciate
the amount of difference in these workers by my giving, not the actual
measurements, but a strictly accurate illustration: the difference was
the same as if we were to see a set of workmen building a house, of whom
many were five feet four inches high, and many sixteen feet high; but we
must in addition suppose that the larger workmen had heads four instead
of three times as big as those of the smaller men, and jaws nearly five
times as big. The jaws, moreover, of the working ants of the several
sizes differed wonderfully in shape, and in the form and number of the
teeth. But the important fact for us is that, though the workers can
be grouped into castes of different sizes, yet they graduate insensibly
into each other, as does the widely-different structure of their jaws. I
speak confidently on this latter point, as Sir J. Lubbock made drawings
for me, with the camera lucida, of the jaws which I dissected from the
workers of the several sizes. Mr. Bates, in his interesting "Naturalist
on the Amazons," has described analogous cases.

With these facts before me, I believe that natural selection, by acting
on the fertile ants or parents, could form a species which should
regularly produce neuters, all of large size with one form of jaw, or
all of small size with widely different jaws; or lastly, and this is the
greatest difficulty, one set of workers of one size and structure, and
simultaneously another set of workers of a different size and structure;
a graduated series having first been formed, as in the case of the
driver ant, and then the extreme forms having been produced in greater
and greater numbers, through the survival of the parents which generated
them, until none with an intermediate structure were produced.

An analogous explanation has been given by Mr. Wallace, of the equally
complex case, of certain Malayan butterflies regularly appearing under
two or even three distinct female forms; and by Fritz Muller, of certain
Brazilian crustaceans likewise appearing under two widely distinct male
forms. But this subject need not here be discussed.

I have now explained how, I believe, the wonderful fact of two
distinctly defined castes of sterile workers existing in the same
nest, both widely different from each other and from their parents, has
originated. We can see how useful their production may have been to a
social community of ants, on the same principle that the division of
labour is useful to civilised man. Ants, however, work by inherited
instincts and by inherited organs or tools, while man works by acquired
knowledge and manufactured instruments. But I must confess, that, with
all my faith in natural selection, I should never have anticipated that
this principle could have been efficient in so high a degree, had not
the case of these neuter insects led me to this conclusion. I have,
therefore, discussed this case, at some little but wholly insufficient
length, in order to show the power of natural selection, and likewise
because this is by far the most serious special difficulty which my
theory has encountered. The case, also, is very interesting, as it
proves that with animals, as with plants, any amount of modification
may be effected by the accumulation of numerous, slight, spontaneous
variations, which are in any way profitable, without exercise or habit
having been brought into play. For peculiar habits, confined to the
workers of sterile females, however long they might be followed, could
not possibly affect the males and fertile females, which alone leave
descendants. I am surprised that no one has advanced this demonstrative
case of neuter insects, against the well-known doctrine of inherited
habit, as advanced by Lamarck.

SUMMARY.

I have endeavoured in this chapter briefly to show that the mental
qualities of our domestic animals vary, and that the variations are
inherited. Still more briefly I have attempted to show that instincts
vary slightly in a state of nature. No one will dispute that instincts
are of the highest importance to each animal. Therefore, there is no
real difficulty, under changing conditions of life, in natural selection
accumulating to any extent slight modifications of instinct which are in
any way useful. In many cases habit or use and disuse have probably
come into play. I do not pretend that the facts given in this chapter
strengthen in any great degree my theory; but none of the cases of
difficulty, to the best of my judgment, annihilate it. On the other
hand, the fact that instincts are not always absolutely perfect and are
liable to mistakes; that no instinct can be shown to have been produced
for the good of other animals, though animals take advantage of the
instincts of others; that the canon in natural history, of "Natura
non facit saltum," is applicable to instincts as well as to corporeal
structure, and is plainly explicable on the foregoing views, but is
otherwise inexplicable--all tend to corroborate the theory of natural
selection.

This theory is also strengthened by some few other facts in regard
to instincts; as by that common case of closely allied, but distinct,
species, when inhabiting distant parts of the world and living under
considerably different conditions of life, yet often retaining nearly
the same instincts. For instance, we can understand, on the principle of
inheritance, how it is that the thrush of tropical South America lines
its nest with mud, in the same peculiar manner as does our British
thrush; how it is that the Hornbills of Africa and India have the same
extraordinary instinct of plastering up and imprisoning the females in a
hole in a tree, with only a small hole left in the plaster through which
the males feed them and their young when hatched; how it is that the
male wrens (Troglodytes) of North America, build "cock-nests," to roost
in, like the males of our Kitty-wrens,--a habit wholly unlike that of
any other known bird. Finally, it may not be a logical deduction, but to
my imagination it is far more satisfactory to look at such instincts as
the young cuckoo ejecting its foster-brothers, ants making slaves, the
larvae of ichneumonidae feeding within the live bodies of caterpillars,
not as specially endowed or created instincts, but as small consequences
of one general law leading to the advancement of all organic
beings--namely, multiply, vary, let the strongest live and the weakest
die.




CHAPTER IX. HYBRIDISM.

 Distinction between the sterility of first crosses and of
 hybrids--Sterility various in degree, not universal, affected by close
 interbreeding, removed by domestication--Laws governing the sterility
 of hybrids--Sterility not a special endowment, but incidental on
 other differences, not accumulated by natural selection--Causes of
 the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids--Parallelism between the
 effects of changed conditions of life and of crossing--Dimorphism and
 trimorphism--Fertility of varieties when crossed and of their mongrel
 offspring not universal--Hybrids and mongrels compared independently of
 their fertility--Summary.


The view commonly entertained by naturalists is that species, when
intercrossed, have been specially endowed with sterility, in order
to prevent their confusion. This view certainly seems at first highly
probable, for species living together could hardly have been kept
distinct had they been capable of freely crossing. The subject is in
many ways important for us, more especially as the sterility of species
when first crossed, and that of their hybrid offspring, cannot have been
acquired, as I shall show, by the preservation of successive profitable
degrees of sterility. It is an incidental result of differences in the
reproductive systems of the parent-species.

In treating this subject, two classes of facts, to a large extent
fundamentally different, have generally been confounded; namely, the
sterility of species when first crossed, and the sterility of the
hybrids produced from them.

Pure species have of course their organs of reproduction in a perfect
condition, yet when intercrossed they produce either few or no
offspring. Hybrids, on the other hand, have their reproductive organs
functionally impotent, as may be clearly seen in the state of the
male element in both plants and animals; though the formative organs
themselves are perfect in structure, as far as the microscope reveals.
In the first case the two sexual elements which go to form the embryo
are perfect; in the second case they are either not at all developed, or
are imperfectly developed. This distinction is important, when the
cause of the sterility, which is common to the two cases, has to be
considered. The distinction probably has been slurred over, owing to the
sterility in both cases being looked on as a special endowment, beyond
the province of our reasoning powers.

The fertility of varieties, that is of the forms known or believed to be
descended from common parents, when crossed, and likewise the fertility
of their mongrel offspring, is, with reference to my theory, of equal
importance with the sterility of species; for it seems to make a broad
and clear distinction between varieties and species.

DEGREES OF STERILITY.

First, for the sterility of species when crossed and of their hybrid
offspring. It is impossible to study the several memoirs and works of
those two conscientious and admirable observers, Kolreuter and Gartner,
who almost devoted their lives to this subject, without being deeply
impressed with the high generality of some degree of sterility.
Kolreuter makes the rule universal; but then he cuts the knot, for in
ten cases in which he found two forms, considered by most authors as
distinct species, quite fertile together, he unhesitatingly ranks them
as varieties. Gartner, also, makes the rule equally universal; and he
disputes the entire fertility of Kolreuter's ten cases. But in these and
in many other cases, Gartner is obliged carefully to count the seeds, in
order to show that there is any degree of sterility. He always compares
the maximum number of seeds produced by two species when first crossed,
and the maximum produced by their hybrid offspring, with the average
number produced by both pure parent-species in a state of nature. But
causes of serious error here intervene: a plant, to be hybridised, must
be castrated, and, what is often more important, must be secluded
in order to prevent pollen being brought to it by insects from other
plants. Nearly all the plants experimented on by Gartner were potted,
and were kept in a chamber in his house. That these processes are often
injurious to the fertility of a plant cannot be doubted; for Gartner
gives in his table about a score of cases of plants which he castrated,
and artificially fertilised with their own pollen, and (excluding
all cases such as the Leguminosae, in which there is an acknowledged
difficulty in the manipulation) half of these twenty plants had their
fertility in some degree impaired. Moreover, as Gartner repeatedly
crossed some forms, such as the common red and blue pimpernels
(Anagallis arvensis and coerulea), which the best botanists rank as
varieties, and found them absolutely sterile, we may doubt whether many
species are really so sterile, when intercrossed, as he believed.

It is certain, on the one hand, that the sterility of various species
when crossed is so different in degree and graduates away so insensibly,
and, on the other hand, that the fertility of pure species is so easily
affected by various circumstances, that for all practical purposes it is
most difficult to say where perfect fertility ends and sterility begins.
I think no better evidence of this can be required than that the two
most experienced observers who have ever lived, namely Kolreuter and
Gartner, arrived at diametrically opposite conclusions in regard to some
of the very same forms. It is also most instructive to compare--but I
have not space here to enter on details--the evidence advanced by our
best botanists on the question whether certain doubtful forms should be
ranked as species or varieties, with the evidence from fertility adduced
by different hybridisers, or by the same observer from experiments made
during different years. It can thus be shown that neither sterility nor
fertility affords any certain distinction between species and varieties.
The evidence from this source graduates away, and is doubtful in the
same degree as is the evidence derived from other constitutional and
structural differences.

In regard to the sterility of hybrids in successive generations; though
Gartner was enabled to rear some hybrids, carefully guarding them from a
cross with either pure parent, for six or seven, and in one case for
ten generations, yet he asserts positively that their fertility never
increases, but generally decreases greatly and suddenly. With respect
to this decrease, it may first be noticed that when any deviation in
structure or constitution is common to both parents, this is often
transmitted in an augmented degree to the offspring; and both sexual
elements in hybrid plants are already affected in some degree. But I
believe that their fertility has been diminished in nearly all these
cases by an independent cause, namely, by too close interbreeding. I
have made so many experiments and collected so many facts, showing on
the one hand that an occasional cross with a distinct individual or
variety increases the vigour and fertility of the offspring, and on
the other hand that very close interbreeding lessens their vigour and
fertility, that I cannot doubt the correctness of this conclusion.
Hybrids are seldom raised by experimentalists in great numbers; and as
the parent-species, or other allied hybrids, generally grow in the same
garden, the visits of insects must be carefully prevented during the
flowering season: hence hybrids, if left to themselves, will generally
be fertilised during each generation by pollen from the same flower; and
this would probably be injurious to their fertility, already lessened
by their hybrid origin. I am strengthened in this conviction by a
remarkable statement repeatedly made by Gartner, namely, that if even
the less fertile hybrids be artificially fertilised with hybrid pollen
of the same kind, their fertility, notwithstanding the frequent ill
effects from manipulation, sometimes decidedly increases, and goes on
increasing. Now, in the process of artificial fertilisation, pollen is
as often taken by chance (as I know from my own experience) from the
anthers of another flower, as from the anthers of the flower itself
which is to be fertilised; so that a cross between two flowers, though
probably often on the same plant, would be thus effected. Moreover,
whenever complicated experiments are in progress, so careful an observer
as Gartner would have castrated his hybrids, and this would have insured
in each generation a cross with pollen from a distinct flower, either
from the same plant or from another plant of the same hybrid nature.
And thus, the strange fact of an increase of fertility in the successive
generations of ARTIFICIALLY FERTILISED hybrids, in contrast with those
spontaneously self-fertilised, may, as I believe, be accounted for by
too close interbreeding having been avoided.

Now let us turn to the results arrived at by a third most experienced
hybridiser, namely, the Hon. and Rev. W. Herbert. He is as emphatic in
his conclusion that some hybrids are perfectly fertile--as fertile as
the pure parent-species--as are Kolreuter and Gartner that some degree
of sterility between distinct species is a universal law of nature.
He experimented on some of the very same species as did Gartner. The
difference in their results may, I think, be in part accounted for by
Herbert's great horticultural skill, and by his having hot-houses at his
command. Of his many important statements I will here give only a single
one as an example, namely, that "every ovule in a pod of Crinum capense
fertilised by C. revolutum produced a plant, which I never saw to occur
in a case of its natural fecundation." So that here we have perfect, or
even more than commonly perfect fertility, in a first cross between two
distinct species.

This case of the Crinum leads me to refer to a singular fact, namely,
that individual plants of certain species of Lobelia, Verbascum and
Passiflora, can easily be fertilised by the pollen from a distinct
species, but not by pollen from the same plant, though this pollen can
be proved to be perfectly sound by fertilising other plants or species.
In the genus Hippeastrum, in Corydalis as shown by Professor Hildebrand,
in various orchids as shown by Mr. Scott and Fritz Muller, all the
individuals are in this peculiar condition. So that with some species,
certain abnormal individuals, and in other species all the individuals,
can actually be hybridised much more readily than they can be fertilised
by pollen from the same individual plant! To give one instance, a bulb
of Hippeastrum aulicum produced four flowers; three were fertilised
by Herbert with their own pollen, and the fourth was subsequently
fertilised by the pollen of a compound hybrid descended from three
distinct species: the result was that "the ovaries of the three first
flowers soon ceased to grow, and after a few days perished entirely,
whereas the pod impregnated by the pollen of the hybrid made vigorous
growth and rapid progress to maturity, and bore good seed, which
vegetated freely." Mr. Herbert tried similar experiments during many
years, and always with the same result. These cases serve to show on
what slight and mysterious causes the lesser or greater fertility of a
species sometimes depends.

The practical experiments of horticulturists, though not made with
scientific precision, deserve some notice. It is notorious in how
complicated a manner the species of Pelargonium, Fuchsia, Calceolaria,
Petunia, Rhododendron, etc., have been crossed, yet many of these
hybrids seed freely. For instance, Herbert asserts that a hybrid from
Calceolaria integrifolia and plantaginea, species most widely dissimilar
in general habit, "reproduces itself as perfectly as if it had been a
natural species from the mountains of Chile." I have taken some pains
to ascertain the degree of fertility of some of the complex crosses of
Rhododendrons, and I am assured that many of them are perfectly fertile.
Mr. C. Noble, for instance, informs me that he raises stocks for
grafting from a hybrid between Rhod. ponticum and catawbiense, and that
this hybrid "seeds as freely as it is possible to imagine." Had hybrids,
when fairly treated, always gone on decreasing in fertility in each
successive generation, as Gartner believed to be the case, the fact
would have been notorious to nurserymen. Horticulturists raise large
beds of the same hybrid, and such alone are fairly treated, for by
insect agency the several individuals are allowed to cross freely with
each other, and the injurious influence of close interbreeding is thus
prevented. Any one may readily convince himself of the efficiency of
insect agency by examining the flowers of the more sterile kinds of
hybrid Rhododendrons, which produce no pollen, for he will find on their
stigmas plenty of pollen brought from other flowers.

In regard to animals, much fewer experiments have been carefully tried
than with plants. If our systematic arrangements can be trusted, that
is, if the genera of animals are as distinct from each other as are the
genera of plants, then we may infer that animals more widely distinct
in the scale of nature can be crossed more easily than in the case
of plants; but the hybrids themselves are, I think, more sterile. It
should, however, be borne in mind that, owing to few animals breeding
freely under confinement, few experiments have been fairly tried: for
instance, the canary-bird has been crossed with nine distinct species of
finches, but, as not one of these breeds freely in confinement, we have
no right to expect that the first crosses between them and the canary,
or that their hybrids, should be perfectly fertile. Again, with respect
to the fertility in successive generations of the more fertile hybrid
animals, I hardly know of an instance in which two families of the same
hybrid have been raised at the same time from different parents, so
as to avoid the ill effects of close interbreeding. On the contrary,
brothers and sisters have usually been crossed in each successive
generation, in opposition to the constantly repeated admonition of every
breeder. And in this case, it is not at all surprising that the inherent
sterility in the hybrids should have gone on increasing.

Although I know of hardly any thoroughly well-authenticated cases of
perfectly fertile hybrid animals, I have reason to believe that the
hybrids from Cervulus vaginalis and Reevesii, and from Phasianus
colchicus with P. torquatus, are perfectly fertile. M. Quatrefages
states that the hybrids from two moths (Bombyx cynthia and arrindia)
were proved in Paris to be fertile inter se for eight generations. It
has lately been asserted that two such distinct species as the hare and
rabbit, when they can be got to breed together, produce offspring, which
are highly fertile when crossed with one of the parent-species. The
hybrids from the common and Chinese geese (A. cygnoides), species which
are so different that they are generally ranked in distinct genera, have
often bred in this country with either pure parent, and in one single
instance they have bred inter se. This was effected by Mr. Eyton, who
raised two hybrids from the same parents, but from different hatches;
and from these two birds he raised no less than eight hybrids
(grandchildren of the pure geese) from one nest. In India, however,
these cross-bred geese must be far more fertile; for I am assured by
two eminently capable judges, namely Mr. Blyth and Captain Hutton, that
whole flocks of these crossed geese are kept in various parts of
the country; and as they are kept for profit, where neither pure
parent-species exists, they must certainly be highly or perfectly
fertile.

With our domesticated animals, the various races when crossed together
are quite fertile; yet in many cases they are descended from two or more
wild species. From this fact we must conclude either that the aboriginal
parent-species at first produced perfectly fertile hybrids, or that the
hybrids subsequently reared under domestication became quite fertile.
This latter alternative, which was first propounded by Pallas, seems by
far the most probable, and can, indeed, hardly be doubted. It is, for
instance, almost certain that our dogs are descended from several wild
stocks; yet, with perhaps the exception of certain indigenous domestic
dogs of South America, all are quite fertile together; but analogy makes
me greatly doubt, whether the several aboriginal species would at first
have freely bred together and have produced quite fertile hybrids.
So again I have lately acquired decisive evidence that the crossed
offspring from the Indian humped and common cattle are inter se
perfectly fertile; and from the observations by Rutimeyer on their
important osteological differences, as well as from those by Mr. Blyth
on their differences in habits, voice, constitution, etc., these two
forms must be regarded as good and distinct species. The same remarks
may be extended to the two chief races of the pig. We must, therefore,
either give up the belief of the universal sterility of species when
crossed; or we must look at this sterility in animals, not as an
indelible characteristic, but as one capable of being removed by
domestication.

Finally, considering all the ascertained facts on the intercrossing of
plants and animals, it may be concluded that some degree of sterility,
both in first crosses and in hybrids, is an extremely general result;
but that it cannot, under our present state of knowledge, be considered
as absolutely universal.

LAWS GOVERNING THE STERILITY OF FIRST CROSSES AND OF HYBRIDS.

We will now consider a little more in detail the laws governing the
sterility of first crosses and of hybrids. Our chief object will be to
see whether or not these laws indicate that species have been specially
endowed with this quality, in order to prevent their crossing and
blending together in utter confusion. The following conclusions are
drawn up chiefly from Gartner's admirable work on the hybridisation
of plants. I have taken much pains to ascertain how far they apply
to animals, and, considering how scanty our knowledge is in regard to
hybrid animals, I have been surprised to find how generally the same
rules apply to both kingdoms.

It has been already remarked, that the degree of fertility, both of
first crosses and of hybrids, graduates from zero to perfect fertility.
It is surprising in how many curious ways this gradation can be shown;
but only the barest outline of the facts can here be given. When pollen
from a plant of one family is placed on the stigma of a plant of a
distinct family, it exerts no more influence than so much inorganic
dust. From this absolute zero of fertility, the pollen of different
species applied to the stigma of some one species of the same genus,
yields a perfect gradation in the number of seeds produced, up to nearly
complete or even quite complete fertility; and, as we have seen, in
certain abnormal cases, even to an excess of fertility, beyond that
which the plant's own pollen produces. So in hybrids themselves, there
are some which never have produced, and probably never would produce,
even with the pollen of the pure parents, a single fertile seed: but in
some of these cases a first trace of fertility may be detected, by
the pollen of one of the pure parent-species causing the flower of the
hybrid to wither earlier than it otherwise would have done; and the
early withering of the flower is well known to be a sign of incipient
fertilisation. From this extreme degree of sterility we have
self-fertilised hybrids producing a greater and greater number of seeds
up to perfect fertility.

The hybrids raised from two species which are very difficult to cross,
and which rarely produce any offspring, are generally very sterile; but
the parallelism between the difficulty of making a first cross, and the
sterility of the hybrids thus produced--two classes of facts which are
generally confounded together--is by no means strict. There are many
cases, in which two pure species, as in the genus Verbascum, can be
united with unusual facility, and produce numerous hybrid offspring,
yet these hybrids are remarkably sterile. On the other hand, there are
species which can be crossed very rarely, or with extreme difficulty,
but the hybrids, when at last produced, are very fertile. Even within
the limits of the same genus, for instance in Dianthus, these two
opposite cases occur.

The fertility, both of first crosses and of hybrids, is more easily
affected by unfavourable conditions, than is that of pure species. But
the fertility of first crosses is likewise innately variable; for it
is not always the same in degree when the same two species are crossed
under the same circumstances; it depends in part upon the constitution
of the individuals which happen to have been chosen for the experiment.
So it is with hybrids, for their degree of fertility is often found to
differ greatly in the several individuals raised from seed out of the
same capsule and exposed to the same conditions.

By the term systematic affinity is meant, the general resemblance
between species in structure and constitution. Now the fertility
of first crosses, and of the hybrids produced from them, is largely
governed by their systematic affinity. This is clearly shown by hybrids
never having been raised between species ranked by systematists in
distinct families; and on the other hand, by very closely allied
species generally uniting with facility. But the correspondence between
systematic affinity and the facility of crossing is by no means strict.
A multitude of cases could be given of very closely allied species which
will not unite, or only with extreme difficulty; and on the other hand
of very distinct species which unite with the utmost facility. In
the same family there may be a genus, as Dianthus, in which very many
species can most readily be crossed; and another genus, as Silene,
in which the most persevering efforts have failed to produce between
extremely close species a single hybrid. Even within the limits of the
same genus, we meet with this same difference; for instance, the many
species of Nicotiana have been more largely crossed than the species of
almost any other genus; but Gartner found that N. acuminata, which is
not a particularly distinct species, obstinately failed to fertilise, or
to be fertilised, by no less than eight other species of Nicotiana. Many
analogous facts could be given.

No one has been able to point out what kind or what amount of
difference, in any recognisable character, is sufficient to prevent two
species crossing. It can be shown that plants most widely different in
habit and general appearance, and having strongly marked differences in
every part of the flower, even in the pollen, in the fruit, and in the
cotyledons, can be crossed. Annual and perennial plants, deciduous and
evergreen trees, plants inhabiting different stations and fitted for
extremely different climates, can often be crossed with ease.

By a reciprocal cross between two species, I mean the case, for
instance, of a female-ass being first crossed by a stallion, and then
a mare by a male-ass: these two species may then be said to have been
reciprocally crossed. There is often the widest possible difference
in the facility of making reciprocal crosses. Such cases are highly
important, for they prove that the capacity in any two species to cross
is often completely independent of their systematic affinity, that is
of any difference in their structure or constitution, excepting in their
reproductive systems. The diversity of the result in reciprocal crosses
between the same two species was long ago observed by Kolreuter. To give
an instance: Mirabilis jalapa can easily be fertilised by the pollen of
M. longiflora, and the hybrids thus produced are sufficiently fertile;
but Kolreuter tried more than two hundred times, during eight following
years, to fertilise reciprocally M. longiflora with the pollen of M.
jalapa, and utterly failed. Several other equally striking cases could
be given. Thuret has observed the same fact with certain sea-weeds
or Fuci. Gartner, moreover, found that this difference of facility in
making reciprocal crosses is extremely common in a lesser degree. He has
observed it even between closely related forms (as Matthiola annua
and glabra) which many botanists rank only as varieties. It is also a
remarkable fact that hybrids raised from reciprocal crosses, though of
course compounded of the very same two species, the one species having
first been used as the father and then as the mother, though they rarely
differ in external characters, yet generally differ in fertility in a
small, and occasionally in a high degree.

Several other singular rules could be given from Gartner: for instance,
some species have a remarkable power of crossing with other species;
other species of the same genus have a remarkable power of impressing
their likeness on their hybrid offspring; but these two powers do not at
all necessarily go together. There are certain hybrids which, instead
of having, as is usual, an intermediate character between their two
parents, always closely resemble one of them; and such hybrids, though
externally so like one of their pure parent-species, are with rare
exceptions extremely sterile. So again among hybrids which are usually
intermediate in structure between their parents, exceptional and
abnormal individuals sometimes are born, which closely resemble one of
their pure parents; and these hybrids are almost always utterly sterile,
even when the other hybrids raised from seed from the same capsule have
a considerable degree of fertility. These facts show how completely the
fertility of a hybrid may be independent of its external resemblance to
either pure parent.

Considering the several rules now given, which govern the fertility
of first crosses and of hybrids, we see that when forms, which must be
considered as good and distinct species, are united, their fertility
graduates from zero to perfect fertility, or even to fertility under
certain conditions in excess; that their fertility, besides being
eminently susceptible to favourable and unfavourable conditions, is
innately variable; that it is by no means always the same in degree in
the first cross and in the hybrids produced from this cross; that the
fertility of hybrids is not related to the degree in which they resemble
in external appearance either parent; and lastly, that the facility of
making a first cross between any two species is not always governed by
their systematic affinity or degree of resemblance to each other. This
latter statement is clearly proved by the difference in the result of
reciprocal crosses between the same two species, for, according as the
one species or the other is used as the father or the mother, there
is generally some difference, and occasionally the widest possible
difference, in the facility of effecting an union. The hybrids,
moreover, produced from reciprocal crosses often differ in fertility.

Now do these complex and singular rules indicate that species have been
endowed with sterility simply to prevent their becoming confounded
in nature? I think not. For why should the sterility be so extremely
different in degree, when various species are crossed, all of which
we must suppose it would be equally important to keep from blending
together? Why should the degree of sterility be innately variable in
the individuals of the same species? Why should some species cross with
facility and yet produce very sterile hybrids; and other species cross
with extreme difficulty, and yet produce fairly fertile hybrids?
Why should there often be so great a difference in the result of a
reciprocal cross between the same two species? Why, it may even be
asked, has the production of hybrids been permitted? To grant to species
the special power of producing hybrids, and then to stop their further
propagation by different degrees of sterility, not strictly related to
the facility of the first union between their parents, seems a strange
arrangement.

The foregoing rules and facts, on the other hand, appear to me clearly
to indicate that the sterility, both of first crosses and of hybrids,
is simply incidental or dependent on unknown differences in their
reproductive systems; the differences being of so peculiar and limited
a nature, that, in reciprocal crosses between the same two species,
the male sexual element of the one will often freely act on the female
sexual element of the other, but not in a reversed direction. It will be
advisable to explain a little more fully, by an example, what I mean
by sterility being incidental on other differences, and not a specially
endowed quality. As the capacity of one plant to be grafted or budded on
another is unimportant for their welfare in a state of nature, I presume
that no one will suppose that this capacity is a SPECIALLY endowed
quality, but will admit that it is incidental on differences in the laws
of growth of the two plants. We can sometimes see the reason why one
tree will not take on another from differences in their rate of growth,
in the hardness of their wood, in the period of the flow or nature of
their sap, etc.; but in a multitude of cases we can assign no reason
whatever. Great diversity in the size of two plants, one being woody and
the other herbaceous, one being evergreen and the other deciduous, and
adaptation to widely different climates, does not always prevent the two
grafting together. As in hybridisation, so with grafting, the capacity
is limited by systematic affinity, for no one has been able to graft
together trees belonging to quite distinct families; and, on the other
hand, closely allied species and varieties of the same species, can
usually, but not invariably, be grafted with ease. But this capacity,
as in hybridisation, is by no means absolutely governed by systematic
affinity. Although many distinct genera within the same family have been
grafted together, in other cases species of the same genus will not take
on each other. The pear can be grafted far more readily on the quince,
which is ranked as a distinct genus, than on the apple, which is a
member of the same genus. Even different varieties of the pear take with
different degrees of facility on the quince; so do different varieties
of the apricot and peach on certain varieties of the plum.

As Gartner found that there was sometimes an innate difference in
different INDIVIDUALS of the same two species in crossing; so Sagaret
believes this to be the case with different individuals of the same
two species in being grafted together. As in reciprocal crosses, the
facility of effecting an union is often very far from equal, so it
sometimes is in grafting. The common gooseberry, for instance, cannot
be grafted on the currant, whereas the currant will take, though with
difficulty, on the gooseberry.

We have seen that the sterility of hybrids which have their reproductive
organs in an imperfect condition, is a different case from the
difficulty of uniting two pure species, which have their reproductive
organs perfect; yet these two distinct classes of cases run to a large
extent parallel. Something analogous occurs in grafting; for Thouin
found that three species of Robinia, which seeded freely on their own
roots, and which could be grafted with no great difficulty on a fourth
species, when thus grafted were rendered barren. On the other hand,
certain species of Sorbus, when grafted on other species, yielded twice
as much fruit as when on their own roots. We are reminded by this latter
fact of the extraordinary cases of Hippeastrum, Passiflora, etc., which
seed much more freely when fertilised with the pollen of a distinct
species than when fertilised with pollen from the same plant.

We thus see that, although there is a clear and great difference between
the mere adhesion of grafted stocks and the union of the male and female
elements in the act of reproduction, yet that there is a rude degree of
parallelism in the results of grafting and of crossing distinct species.
And as we must look at the curious and complex laws governing the
facility with which trees can be grafted on each other as incidental on
unknown differences in their vegetative systems, so I believe that the
still more complex laws governing the facility of first crosses are
incidental on unknown differences in their reproductive systems. These
differences in both cases follow, to a certain extent, as might
have been expected, systematic affinity, by which term every kind of
resemblance and dissimilarity between organic beings is attempted to be
expressed. The facts by no means seem to indicate that the greater or
lesser difficulty of either grafting or crossing various species
has been a special endowment; although in the case of crossing, the
difficulty is as important for the endurance and stability of specific
forms as in the case of grafting it is unimportant for their welfare.

ORIGIN AND CAUSES OF THE STERILITY OF FIRST CROSSES AND OF HYBRIDS.

At one time it appeared to me probable, as it has to others, that
the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids might have been slowly
acquired through the natural selection of slightly lessened degrees of
fertility, which, like any other variation, spontaneously appeared in
certain individuals of one variety when crossed with those of another
variety. For it would clearly be advantageous to two varieties or
incipient species if they could be kept from blending, on the same
principle that, when man is selecting at the same time two varieties, it
is necessary that he should keep them separate. In the first place,
it may be remarked that species inhabiting distinct regions are often
sterile when crossed; now it could clearly have been of no advantage
to such separated species to have been rendered mutually sterile,
and consequently this could not have been effected through natural
selection; but it may perhaps be argued, that, if a species was rendered
sterile with some one compatriot, sterility with other species would
follow as a necessary contingency. In the second place, it is almost as
much opposed to the theory of natural selection as to that of special
creation, that in reciprocal crosses the male element of one form should
have been rendered utterly impotent on a second form, while at the same
time the male element of this second form is enabled freely to fertilise
the first form; for this peculiar state of the reproductive system could
hardly have been advantageous to either species.

In considering the probability of natural selection having come into
action, in rendering species mutually sterile, the greatest difficulty
will be found to lie in the existence of many graduated steps, from
slightly lessened fertility to absolute sterility. It may be admitted
that it would profit an incipient species, if it were rendered in some
slight degree sterile when crossed with its parent form or with some
other variety; for thus fewer bastardised and deteriorated offspring
would be produced to commingle their blood with the new species in
process of formation. But he who will take the trouble to reflect on the
steps by which this first degree of sterility could be increased through
natural selection to that high degree which is common with so
many species, and which is universal with species which have been
differentiated to a generic or family rank, will find the subject
extraordinarily complex. After mature reflection, it seems to me that
this could not have been effected through natural selection. Take the
case of any two species which, when crossed, produced few and sterile
offspring; now, what is there which could favour the survival of those
individuals which happened to be endowed in a slightly higher degree
with mutual infertility, and which thus approached by one small step
towards absolute sterility? Yet an advance of this kind, if the theory
of natural selection be brought to bear, must have incessantly occurred
with many species, for a multitude are mutually quite barren. With
sterile neuter insects we have reason to believe that modifications in
their structure and fertility have been slowly accumulated by natural
selection, from an advantage having been thus indirectly given to the
community to which they belonged over other communities of the same
species; but an individual animal not belonging to a social community,
if rendered slightly sterile when crossed with some other variety, would
not thus itself gain any advantage or indirectly give any advantage
to the other individuals of the same variety, thus leading to their
preservation.

But it would be superfluous to discuss this question in detail: for with
plants we have conclusive evidence that the sterility of crossed species
must be due to some principle, quite independent of natural selection.
Both Gartner and Kolreuter have proved that in genera including numerous
species, a series can be formed from species which when crossed yield
fewer and fewer seeds, to species which never produce a single seed, but
yet are affected by the pollen of certain other species, for the germen
swells. It is here manifestly impossible to select the more sterile
individuals, which have already ceased to yield seeds; so that this acme
of sterility, when the germen alone is effected, cannot have been gained
through selection; and from the laws governing the various grades of
sterility being so uniform throughout the animal and vegetable kingdoms,
we may infer that the cause, whatever it may be, is the same or nearly
the same in all cases.

We will now look a little closer at the probable nature of the
differences between species which induce sterility in first crosses and
in hybrids. In the case of first crosses, the greater or less difficulty
in effecting a union and in obtaining offspring apparently depends
on several distinct causes. There must sometimes be a physical
impossibility in the male element reaching the ovule, as would be the
case with a plant having a pistil too long for the pollen-tubes to
reach the ovarium. It has also been observed that when the pollen of one
species is placed on the stigma of a distantly allied species, though
the pollen-tubes protrude, they do not penetrate the stigmatic surface.
Again, the male element may reach the female element, but be incapable
of causing an embryo to be developed, as seems to have been the case
with some of Thuret's experiments on Fuci. No explanation can be given
of these facts, any more than why certain trees cannot be grafted on
others. Lastly, an embryo may be developed, and then perish at an early
period. This latter alternative has not been sufficiently attended to;
but I believe, from observations communicated to me by Mr. Hewitt, who
has had great experience in hybridising pheasants and fowls, that the
early death of the embryo is a very frequent cause of sterility in first
crosses. Mr. Salter has recently given the results of an examination of
about 500 eggs produced from various crosses between three species
of Gallus and their hybrids; the majority of these eggs had been
fertilised; and in the majority of the fertilised eggs, the embryos had
either been partially developed and had then perished, or had become
nearly mature, but the young chickens had been unable to break through
the shell. Of the chickens which were born, more than four-fifths died
within the first few days, or at latest weeks, "without any obvious
cause, apparently from mere inability to live;" so that from the 500
eggs only twelve chickens were reared. With plants, hybridized embryos
probably often perish in a like manner; at least it is known that
hybrids raised from very distinct species are sometimes weak and
dwarfed, and perish at an early age; of which fact Max Wichura has
recently given some striking cases with hybrid willows. It may be here
worth noticing that in some cases of parthenogenesis, the embryos within
the eggs of silk moths which had not been fertilised, pass through their
early stages of development and then perish like the embryos produced by
a cross between distinct species. Until becoming acquainted with these
facts, I was unwilling to believe in the frequent early death of
hybrid embryos; for hybrids, when once born, are generally healthy and
long-lived, as we see in the case of the common mule. Hybrids, however,
are differently circumstanced before and after birth: when born and
living in a country where their two parents live, they are generally
placed under suitable conditions of life. But a hybrid partakes of only
half of the nature and constitution of its mother; it may therefore,
before birth, as long as it is nourished within its mother's womb, or
within the egg or seed produced by the mother, be exposed to conditions
in some degree unsuitable, and consequently be liable to perish at an
early period; more especially as all very young beings are eminently
sensitive to injurious or unnatural conditions of life. But after all,
the cause more probably lies in some imperfection in the original act
of impregnation, causing the embryo to be imperfectly developed, rather
than in the conditions to which it is subsequently exposed.

In regard to the sterility of hybrids, in which the sexual elements are
imperfectly developed, the case is somewhat different. I have more than
once alluded to a large body of facts showing that, when animals and
plants are removed from their natural conditions, they are extremely
liable to have their reproductive systems seriously affected. This,
in fact, is the great bar to the domestication of animals. Between the
sterility thus superinduced and that of hybrids, there are many points
of similarity. In both cases the sterility is independent of general
health, and is often accompanied by excess of size or great luxuriance.
In both cases the sterility occurs in various degrees; in both, the male
element is the most liable to be affected; but sometimes the female
more than the male. In both, the tendency goes to a certain extent with
systematic affinity, for whole groups of animals and plants are rendered
impotent by the same unnatural conditions; and whole groups of species
tend to produce sterile hybrids. On the other hand, one species in a
group will sometimes resist great changes of conditions with unimpaired
fertility; and certain species in a group will produce unusually fertile
hybrids. No one can tell till he tries, whether any particular animal
will breed under confinement, or any exotic plant seed freely under
culture; nor can he tell till he tries, whether any two species of a
genus will produce more or less sterile hybrids. Lastly, when organic
beings are placed during several generations under conditions not
natural to them, they are extremely liable to vary, which seems to be
partly due to their reproductive systems having been specially affected,
though in a lesser degree than when sterility ensues. So it is with
hybrids, for their offspring in successive generations are eminently
liable to vary, as every experimentalist has observed.

Thus we see that when organic beings are placed under new and unnatural
conditions, and when hybrids are produced by the unnatural crossing of
two species, the reproductive system, independently of the general state
of health, is affected in a very similar manner. In the one case, the
conditions of life have been disturbed, though often in so slight a
degree as to be inappreciable by us; in the other case, or that of
hybrids, the external conditions have remained the same, but the
organisation has been disturbed by two distinct structures and
constitutions, including of course the reproductive systems, having been
blended into one. For it is scarcely possible that two organisations
should be compounded into one, without some disturbance occurring in the
development, or periodical action, or mutual relations of the different
parts and organs one to another or to the conditions of life. When
hybrids are able to breed inter se, they transmit to their offspring
from generation to generation the same compounded organisation, and
hence we need not be surprised that their sterility, though in some
degree variable, does not diminish; it is even apt to increase,
this being generally the result, as before explained, of too close
interbreeding. The above view of the sterility of hybrids being caused
by two constitutions being compounded into one has been strongly
maintained by Max Wichura.

It must, however, be owned that we cannot understand, on the above or
any other view, several facts with respect to the sterility of hybrids;
for instance, the unequal fertility of hybrids produced from reciprocal
crosses; or the increased sterility in those hybrids which occasionally
and exceptionally resemble closely either pure parent. Nor do I pretend
that the foregoing remarks go to the root of the matter: no explanation
is offered why an organism, when placed under unnatural conditions,
is rendered sterile. All that I have attempted to show is, that in two
cases, in some respects allied, sterility is the common result--in the
one case from the conditions of life having been disturbed, in the other
case from the organisation having been disturbed by two organisations
being compounded into one.

A similar parallelism holds good with an allied yet very different
class of facts. It is an old and almost universal belief, founded on a
considerable body of evidence, which I have elsewhere given, that slight
changes in the conditions of life are beneficial to all living things.
We see this acted on by farmers and gardeners in their frequent
exchanges of seed, tubers, etc., from one soil or climate to another,
and back again. During the convalescence of animals, great benefit is
derived from almost any change in their habits of life. Again, both with
plants and animals, there is the clearest evidence that a cross between
individuals of the same species, which differ to a certain extent, gives
vigour and fertility to the offspring; and that close interbreeding
continued during several generations between the nearest relations, if
these be kept under the same conditions of life, almost always leads to
decreased size, weakness, or sterility.

Hence it seems that, on the one hand, slight changes in the conditions
of life benefit all organic beings, and on the other hand, that slight
crosses, that is, crosses between the males and females of the same
species, which have been subjected to slightly different conditions, or
which have slightly varied, give vigour and fertility to the offspring.
But, as we have seen, organic beings long habituated to certain
uniform conditions under a state of nature, when subjected, as under
confinement, to a considerable change in their conditions, very
frequently are rendered more or less sterile; and we know that a cross
between two forms that have become widely or specifically different,
produce hybrids which are almost always in some degree sterile. I am
fully persuaded that this double parallelism is by no means an accident
or an illusion. He who is able to explain why the elephant, and a
multitude of other animals, are incapable of breeding when kept under
only partial confinement in their native country, will be able to
explain the primary cause of hybrids being so generally sterile. He will
at the same time be able to explain how it is that the races of some of
our domesticated animals, which have often been subjected to new and
not uniform conditions, are quite fertile together, although they are
descended from distinct species, which would probably have been sterile
if aboriginally crossed. The above two parallel series of facts seem
to be connected together by some common but unknown bond, which is
essentially related to the principle of life; this principle, according
to Mr. Herbert Spencer, being that life depends on, or consists in, the
incessant action and reaction of various forces, which, as throughout
nature, are always tending towards an equilibrium; and when this
tendency is slightly disturbed by any change, the vital forces gain in
power.

RECIPROCAL DIMORPHISM AND TRIMORPHISM.

This subject may be here briefly discussed, and will be found to throw
some light on hybridism. Several plants belonging to distinct orders
present two forms, which exist in about equal numbers and which differ
in no respect except in their reproductive organs; one form having
a long pistil with short stamens, the other a short pistil with long
stamens; the two having differently sized pollen-grains. With trimorphic
plants there are three forms likewise differing in the lengths of their
pistils and stamens, in the size and colour of the pollen-grains, and
in some other respects; and as in each of the three forms there are two
sets of stamens, the three forms possess altogether six sets of stamens
and three kinds of pistils. These organs are so proportioned in length
to each other that half the stamens in two of the forms stand on a level
with the stigma of the third form. Now I have shown, and the result
has been confirmed by other observers, that in order to obtain full
fertility with these plants, it is necessary that the stigma of the
one form should be fertilised by pollen taken from the stamens of
corresponding height in another form. So that with dimorphic species
two unions, which may be called legitimate, are fully fertile; and
two, which may be called illegitimate, are more or less infertile. With
trimorphic species six unions are legitimate, or fully fertile, and
twelve are illegitimate, or more or less infertile.

The infertility which may be observed in various dimorphic and
trimorphic plants, when they are illegitimately fertilised, that is by
pollen taken from stamens not corresponding in height with the pistil,
differs much in degree, up to absolute and utter sterility; just in the
same manner as occurs in crossing distinct species. As the degree
of sterility in the latter case depends in an eminent degree on the
conditions of life being more or less favourable, so I have found it
with illegitimate unions. It is well known that if pollen of a distinct
species be placed on the stigma of a flower, and its own pollen be
afterwards, even after a considerable interval of time, placed on the
same stigma, its action is so strongly prepotent that it generally
annihilates the effect of the foreign pollen; so it is with the pollen
of the several forms of the same species, for legitimate pollen is
strongly prepotent over illegitimate pollen, when both are placed on the
same stigma. I ascertained this by fertilising several flowers, first
illegitimately, and twenty-four hours afterwards legitimately, with
pollen taken from a peculiarly coloured variety, and all the seedlings
were similarly coloured; this shows that the legitimate pollen,
though applied twenty-four hours subsequently, had wholly destroyed
or prevented the action of the previously applied illegitimate pollen.
Again, as in making reciprocal crosses between the same two species,
there is occasionally a great difference in the result, so the same
thing occurs with trimorphic plants; for instance, the mid-styled form
of Lythrum salicaria was illegitimately fertilised with the greatest
ease by pollen from the longer stamens of the short-styled form, and
yielded many seeds; but the latter form did not yield a single seed when
fertilised by the longer stamens of the mid-styled form.

In all these respects, and in others which might be added, the forms
of the same undoubted species, when illegitimately united, behave in
exactly the same manner as do two distinct species when crossed. This
led me carefully to observe during four years many seedlings, raised
from several illegitimate unions. The chief result is that these
illegitimate plants, as they may be called, are not fully fertile. It
is possible to raise from dimorphic species, both long-styled and
short-styled illegitimate plants, and from trimorphic plants all three
illegitimate forms. These can then be properly united in a legitimate
manner. When this is done, there is no apparent reason why they
should not yield as many seeds as did their parents when legitimately
fertilised. But such is not the case. They are all infertile, in various
degrees; some being so utterly and incurably sterile that they did
not yield during four seasons a single seed or even seed-capsule. The
sterility of these illegitimate plants, when united with each other in
a legitimate manner, may be strictly compared with that of hybrids when
crossed inter se. If, on the other hand, a hybrid is crossed with either
pure parent-species, the sterility is usually much lessened: and so it
is when an illegitimate plant is fertilised by a legitimate plant. In
the same manner as the sterility of hybrids does not always run
parallel with the difficulty of making the first cross between the two
parent-species, so that sterility of certain illegitimate plants was
unusually great, while the sterility of the union from which they
were derived was by no means great. With hybrids raised from the same
seed-capsule the degree of sterility is innately variable, so it is in a
marked manner with illegitimate plants. Lastly, many hybrids are profuse
and persistent flowerers, while other and more sterile hybrids produce
few flowers, and are weak, miserable dwarfs; exactly similar cases occur
with the illegitimate offspring of various dimorphic and trimorphic
plants.

Altogether there is the closest identity in character and behaviour
between illegitimate plants and hybrids. It is hardly an exaggeration
to maintain that illegitimate plants are hybrids, produced within the
limits of the same species by the improper union of certain forms, while
ordinary hybrids are produced from an improper union between so-called
distinct species. We have also already seen that there is the closest
similarity in all respects between first illegitimate unions and first
crosses between distinct species. This will perhaps be made more fully
apparent by an illustration; we may suppose that a botanist found two
well-marked varieties (and such occur) of the long-styled form of the
trimorphic Lythrum salicaria, and that he determined to try by crossing
whether they were specifically distinct. He would find that they yielded
only about one-fifth of the proper number of seed, and that they behaved
in all the other above specified respects as if they had been two
distinct species. But to make the case sure, he would raise plants from
his supposed hybridised seed, and he would find that the seedlings were
miserably dwarfed and utterly sterile, and that they behaved in all
other respects like ordinary hybrids. He might then maintain that he
had actually proved, in accordance with the common view, that his two
varieties were as good and as distinct species as any in the world; but
he would be completely mistaken.

The facts now given on dimorphic and trimorphic plants are important,
because they show us, first, that the physiological test of lessened
fertility, both in first crosses and in hybrids, is no safe criterion
of specific distinction; secondly, because we may conclude that there is
some unknown bond which connects the infertility of illegitimate unions
with that of their illegitimate offspring, and we are led to extend the
same view to first crosses and hybrids; thirdly, because we find, and
this seems to me of especial importance, that two or three forms of the
same species may exist and may differ in no respect whatever, either in
structure or in constitution, relatively to external conditions, and yet
be sterile when united in certain ways. For we must remember that it is
the union of the sexual elements of individuals of the same form, for
instance, of two long-styled forms, which results in sterility; while it
is the union of the sexual elements proper to two distinct forms which
is fertile. Hence the case appears at first sight exactly the reverse
of what occurs, in the ordinary unions of the individuals of the same
species and with crosses between distinct species. It is, however,
doubtful whether this is really so; but I will not enlarge on this
obscure subject.

We may, however, infer as probable from the consideration of dimorphic
and trimorphic plants, that the sterility of distinct species when
crossed and of their hybrid progeny, depends exclusively on the nature
of their sexual elements, and not on any difference in their structure
or general constitution. We are also led to this same conclusion by
considering reciprocal crosses, in which the male of one species cannot
be united, or can be united with great difficulty, with the female of
a second species, while the converse cross can be effected with perfect
facility. That excellent observer, Gartner, likewise concluded that
species when crossed are sterile owing to differences confined to their
reproductive systems.

FERTILITY OF VARIETIES WHEN CROSSED, AND OF THEIR MONGREL OFFSPRING, NOT
UNIVERSAL.

It may be urged as an overwhelming argument that there must be some
essential distinction between species and varieties inasmuch as the
latter, however much they may differ from each other in external
appearance, cross with perfect facility, and yield perfectly fertile
offspring. With some exceptions, presently to be given, I fully admit
that this is the rule. But the subject is surrounded by difficulties,
for, looking to varieties produced under nature, if two forms hitherto
reputed to be varieties be found in any degree sterile together, they
are at once ranked by most naturalists as species. For instance, the
blue and red pimpernel, which are considered by most botanists as
varieties, are said by Gartner to be quite sterile when crossed, and
he consequently ranks them as undoubted species. If we thus argue in
a circle, the fertility of all varieties produced under nature will
assuredly have to be granted.

If we turn to varieties, produced, or supposed to have been produced,
under domestication, we are still involved in some doubt. For when it
is stated, for instance, that certain South American indigenous domestic
dogs do not readily unite with European dogs, the explanation which will
occur to everyone, and probably the true one, is that they are descended
from aboriginally distinct species. Nevertheless the perfect fertility
of so many domestic races, differing widely from each other in
appearance, for instance, those of the pigeon, or of the cabbage, is a
remarkable fact; more especially when we reflect how many species there
are, which, though resembling each other most closely, are utterly
sterile when intercrossed. Several considerations, however, render the
fertility of domestic varieties less remarkable. In the first place,
it may be observed that the amount of external difference between two
species is no sure guide to their degree of mutual sterility, so that
similar differences in the case of varieties would be no sure guide. It
is certain that with species the cause lies exclusively in differences
in their sexual constitution. Now the varying conditions to which
domesticated animals and cultivated plants have been subjected, have had
so little tendency towards modifying the reproductive system in a manner
leading to mutual sterility, that we have good grounds for admitting
the directly opposite doctrine of Pallas, namely, that such conditions
generally eliminate this tendency; so that the domesticated descendants
of species, which in their natural state probably would have been in
some degree sterile when crossed, become perfectly fertile together.
With plants, so far is cultivation from giving a tendency towards
sterility between distinct species, that in several well-authenticated
cases already alluded to, certain plants have been affected in an
opposite manner, for they have become self-impotent, while still
retaining the capacity of fertilising, and being fertilised by, other
species. If the Pallasian doctrine of the elimination of sterility
through long-continued domestication be admitted, and it can hardly
be rejected, it becomes in the highest degree improbable that similar
conditions long-continued should likewise induce this tendency; though
in certain cases, with species having a peculiar constitution, sterility
might occasionally be thus caused. Thus, as I believe, we can understand
why, with domesticated animals, varieties have not been produced
which are mutually sterile; and why with plants only a few such cases,
immediately to be given, have been observed.

The real difficulty in our present subject is not, as it appears to me,
why domestic varieties have not become mutually infertile when crossed,
but why this has so generally occurred with natural varieties, as soon
as they have been permanently modified in a sufficient degree to take
rank as species. We are far from precisely knowing the cause; nor is
this surprising, seeing how profoundly ignorant we are in regard to the
normal and abnormal action of the reproductive system. But we can
see that species, owing to their struggle for existence with numerous
competitors, will have been exposed during long periods of time to more
uniform conditions, than have domestic varieties; and this may well make
a wide difference in the result. For we know how commonly wild animals
and plants, when taken from their natural conditions and subjected
to captivity, are rendered sterile; and the reproductive functions of
organic beings which have always lived under natural conditions would
probably in like manner be eminently sensitive to the influence of an
unnatural cross. Domesticated productions, on the other hand, which,
as shown by the mere fact of their domestication, were not originally
highly sensitive to changes in their conditions of life, and which can
now generally resist with undiminished fertility repeated changes of
conditions, might be expected to produce varieties, which would be
little liable to have their reproductive powers injuriously affected by
the act of crossing with other varieties which had originated in a like
manner.

I have as yet spoken as if the varieties of the same species were
invariably fertile when intercrossed. But it is impossible to resist the
evidence of the existence of a certain amount of sterility in the few
following cases, which I will briefly abstract. The evidence is at least
as good as that from which we believe in the sterility of a multitude of
species. The evidence is also derived from hostile witnesses, who in
all other cases consider fertility and sterility as safe criterions of
specific distinction. Gartner kept, during several years, a dwarf kind
of maize with yellow seeds, and a tall variety with red seeds growing
near each other in his garden; and although these plants have separated
sexes, they never naturally crossed. He then fertilised thirteen
flowers of the one kind with pollen of the other; but only a single
head produced any seed, and this one head produced only five grains.
Manipulation in this case could not have been injurious, as the plants
have separated sexes. No one, I believe, has suspected that these
varieties of maize are distinct species; and it is important to notice
that the hybrid plants thus raised were themselves PERFECTLY fertile;
so that even Gartner did not venture to consider the two varieties as
specifically distinct.

Girou de Buzareingues crossed three varieties of gourd, which like
the maize has separated sexes, and he asserts that their mutual
fertilisation is by so much the less easy as their differences are
greater. How far these experiments may be trusted, I know not; but
the forms experimented on are ranked by Sagaret, who mainly founds his
classification by the test of infertility, as varieties, and Naudin has
come to the same conclusion.

The following case is far more remarkable, and seems at first
incredible; but it is the result of an astonishing number of experiments
made during many years on nine species of Verbascum, by so good an
observer and so hostile a witness as Gartner: namely, that the yellow
and white varieties when crossed produce less seed than the similarly
coloured varieties of the same species. Moreover, he asserts that, when
yellow and white varieties of one species are crossed with yellow and
white varieties of a DISTINCT species, more seed is produced by the
crosses between the similarly coloured flowers, than between those which
are differently coloured. Mr. Scott also has experimented on the species
and varieties of Verbascum; and although unable to confirm Gartner's
results on the crossing of the distinct species, he finds that the
dissimilarly coloured varieties of the same species yield fewer seeds,
in the proportion of eighty-six to 100, than the similarly coloured
varieties. Yet these varieties differ in no respect, except in the
colour of their flowers; and one variety can sometimes be raised from
the seed of another.

Kolreuter, whose accuracy has been confirmed by every subsequent
observer, has proved the remarkable fact that one particular variety
of the common tobacco was more fertile than the other varieties, when
crossed with a widely distinct species. He experimented on five forms
which are commonly reputed to be varieties, and which he tested by
the severest trial, namely, by reciprocal crosses, and he found their
mongrel offspring perfectly fertile. But one of these five varieties,
when used either as the father or mother, and crossed with the Nicotiana
glutinosa, always yielded hybrids not so sterile as those which were
produced from the four other varieties when crossed with N. glutinosa.
Hence the reproductive system of this one variety must have been in some
manner and in some degree modified.

From these facts it can no longer be maintained that varieties when
crossed are invariably quite fertile. From the great difficulty of
ascertaining the infertility of varieties in a state of nature, for a
supposed variety, if proved to be infertile in any degree, would almost
universally be ranked as a species; from man attending only to external
characters in his domestic varieties, and from such varieties not having
been exposed for very long periods to uniform conditions of life; from
these several considerations we may conclude that fertility does not
constitute a fundamental distinction between varieties and species when
crossed. The general sterility of crossed species may safely be looked
at, not as a special acquirement or endowment, but as incidental on
changes of an unknown nature in their sexual elements.

HYBRIDS AND MONGRELS COMPARED, INDEPENDENTLY OF THEIR FERTILITY.

Independently of the question of fertility, the offspring of species
and of varieties when crossed may be compared in several other respects.
Gartner, whose strong wish it was to draw a distinct line between
species and varieties, could find very few, and, as it seems to me,
quite unimportant differences between the so-called hybrid offspring of
species, and the so-called mongrel offspring of varieties. And, on the
other hand, they agree most closely in many important respects.

I shall here discuss this subject with extreme brevity. The most
important distinction is, that in the first generation mongrels are
more variable than hybrids; but Gartner admits that hybrids from
species which have long been cultivated are often variable in the first
generation; and I have myself seen striking instances of this fact.
Gartner further admits that hybrids between very closely allied species
are more variable than those from very distinct species; and this shows
that the difference in the degree of variability graduates away.
When mongrels and the more fertile hybrids are propagated for several
generations, an extreme amount of variability in the offspring in both
cases is notorious; but some few instances of both hybrids and mongrels
long retaining a uniform character could be given. The variability,
however, in the successive generations of mongrels is, perhaps, greater
than in hybrids.

This greater variability in mongrels than in hybrids does not seem at
all surprising. For the parents of mongrels are varieties, and mostly
domestic varieties (very few experiments having been tried on natural
varieties), and this implies that there has been recent variability;
which would often continue and would augment that arising from the act
of crossing. The slight variability of hybrids in the first generation,
in contrast with that in the succeeding generations, is a curious fact
and deserves attention. For it bears on the view which I have taken of
one of the causes of ordinary variability; namely, that the reproductive
system, from being eminently sensitive to changed conditions of life,
fails under these circumstances to perform its proper function of
producing offspring closely similar in all respects to the parent-form.
Now, hybrids in the first generation are descended from species
(excluding those long cultivated) which have not had their reproductive
systems in any way affected, and they are not variable; but hybrids
themselves have their reproductive systems seriously affected, and their
descendants are highly variable.

But to return to our comparison of mongrels and hybrids: Gartner states
that mongrels are more liable than hybrids to revert to either parent
form; but this, if it be true, is certainly only a difference in degree.
Moreover, Gartner expressly states that the hybrids from long cultivated
plants are more subject to reversion than hybrids from species in their
natural state; and this probably explains the singular difference in
the results arrived at by different observers. Thus Max Wichura doubts
whether hybrids ever revert to their parent forms, and he experimented
on uncultivated species of willows, while Naudin, on the other hand,
insists in the strongest terms on the almost universal tendency to
reversion in hybrids, and he experimented chiefly on cultivated plants.
Gartner further states that when any two species, although most closely
allied to each other, are crossed with a third species, the hybrids are
widely different from each other; whereas if two very distinct varieties
of one species are crossed with another species, the hybrids do not
differ much. But this conclusion, as far as I can make out, is founded
on a single experiment; and seems directly opposed to the results of
several experiments made by Kolreuter.

Such alone are the unimportant differences which Gartner is able to
point out between hybrid and mongrel plants. On the other hand, the
degrees and kinds of resemblance in mongrels and in hybrids to their
respective parents, more especially in hybrids produced from nearly
related species, follow, according to Gartner the same laws. When two
species are crossed, one has sometimes a prepotent power of impressing
its likeness on the hybrid. So I believe it to be with varieties of
plants; and with animals, one variety certainly often has this prepotent
power over another variety. Hybrid plants produced from a reciprocal
cross generally resemble each other closely, and so it is with mongrel
plants from a reciprocal cross. Both hybrids and mongrels can be
reduced to either pure parent form, by repeated crosses in successive
generations with either parent.

These several remarks are apparently applicable to animals; but the
subject is here much complicated, partly owing to the existence of
secondary sexual characters; but more especially owing to prepotency
in transmitting likeness running more strongly in one sex than in
the other, both when one species is crossed with another and when one
variety is crossed with another variety. For instance, I think those
authors are right who maintain that the ass has a prepotent power over
the horse, so that both the mule and the hinny resemble more closely the
ass than the horse; but that the prepotency runs more strongly in the
male than in the female ass, so that the mule, which is an offspring of
the male ass and mare, is more like an ass than is the hinny, which is
the offspring of the female-ass and stallion.

Much stress has been laid by some authors on the supposed fact, that
it is only with mongrels that the offspring are not intermediate in
character, but closely resemble one of their parents; but this does
sometimes occur with hybrids, yet I grant much less frequently than
with mongrels. Looking to the cases which I have collected of cross-bred
animals closely resembling one parent, the resemblances seem chiefly
confined to characters almost monstrous in their nature, and which have
suddenly appeared--such as albinism, melanism, deficiency of tail or
horns, or additional fingers and toes; and do not relate to characters
which have been slowly acquired through selection. A tendency to sudden
reversions to the perfect character of either parent would, also,
be much more likely to occur with mongrels, which are descended from
varieties often suddenly produced and semi-monstrous in character, than
with hybrids, which are descended from species slowly and naturally
produced. On the whole, I entirely agree with Dr. Prosper Lucas, who,
after arranging an enormous body of facts with respect to animals,
comes to the conclusion that the laws of resemblance of the child to its
parents are the same, whether the two parents differ little or much from
each other, namely, in the union of individuals of the same variety, or
of different varieties, or of distinct species.

Independently of the question of fertility and sterility, in all
other respects there seems to be a general and close similarity in the
offspring of crossed species, and of crossed varieties. If we look at
species as having been specially created, and at varieties as having
been produced by secondary laws, this similarity would be an astonishing
fact. But it harmonises perfectly with the view that there is no
essential distinction between species and varieties.

SUMMARY OF CHAPTER.

First crosses between forms, sufficiently distinct to be ranked as
species, and their hybrids, are very generally, but not universally,
sterile. The sterility is of all degrees, and is often so slight that
the most careful experimentalists have arrived at diametrically opposite
conclusions in ranking forms by this test. The sterility is innately
variable in individuals of the same species, and is eminently
susceptible to action of favourable and unfavourable conditions. The
degree of sterility does not strictly follow systematic affinity, but is
governed by several curious and complex laws. It is generally different,
and sometimes widely different in reciprocal crosses between the same
two species. It is not always equal in degree in a first cross and in
the hybrids produced from this cross.

In the same manner as in grafting trees, the capacity in one species or
variety to take on another, is incidental on differences, generally
of an unknown nature, in their vegetative systems, so in crossing,
the greater or less facility of one species to unite with another is
incidental on unknown differences in their reproductive systems. There
is no more reason to think that species have been specially endowed with
various degrees of sterility to prevent their crossing and blending
in nature, than to think that trees have been specially endowed with
various and somewhat analogous degrees of difficulty in being grafted
together in order to prevent their inarching in our forests.

The sterility of first crosses and of their hybrid progeny has not been
acquired through natural selection. In the case of first crosses it
seems to depend on several circumstances; in some instances in chief
part on the early death of the embryo. In the case of hybrids, it
apparently depends on their whole organisation having been disturbed by
being compounded from two distinct forms; the sterility being closely
allied to that which so frequently affects pure species, when exposed to
new and unnatural conditions of life. He who will explain these latter
cases will be able to explain the sterility of hybrids. This view is
strongly supported by a parallelism of another kind: namely, that,
firstly, slight changes in the conditions of life add to the vigour
and fertility of all organic beings; and secondly, that the crossing of
forms, which have been exposed to slightly different conditions of life,
or which have varied, favours the size, vigour and fertility of their
offspring. The facts given on the sterility of the illegitimate unions
of dimorphic and trimorphic plants and of their illegitimate progeny,
perhaps render it probable that some unknown bond in all cases connects
the degree of fertility of first unions with that of their offspring.
The consideration of these facts on dimorphism, as well as of the
results of reciprocal crosses, clearly leads to the conclusion that
the primary cause of the sterility of crossed species is confined to
differences in their sexual elements. But why, in the case of distinct
species, the sexual elements should so generally have become more or
less modified, leading to their mutual infertility, we do not know; but
it seems to stand in some close relation to species having been exposed
for long periods of time to nearly uniform conditions of life.

It is not surprising that the difficulty in crossing any two species,
and the sterility of their hybrid offspring, should in most cases
correspond, even if due to distinct causes: for both depend on the
amount of difference between the species which are crossed. Nor is
it surprising that the facility of effecting a first cross, and the
fertility of the hybrids thus produced, and the capacity of being
grafted together--though this latter capacity evidently depends on
widely different circumstances--should all run, to a certain extent,
parallel with the systematic affinity of the forms subjected to
experiment; for systematic affinity includes resemblances of all kinds.

First crosses between forms known to be varieties, or sufficiently alike
to be considered as varieties, and their mongrel offspring, are very
generally, but not, as is so often stated, invariably fertile. Nor
is this almost universal and perfect fertility surprising, when it
is remembered how liable we are to argue in a circle with respect to
varieties in a state of nature; and when we remember that the greater
number of varieties have been produced under domestication by the
selection of mere external differences, and that they have not been long
exposed to uniform conditions of life. It should also be especially kept
in mind, that long-continued domestication tends to eliminate
sterility, and is therefore little likely to induce this same quality.
Independently of the question of fertility, in all other respects there
is the closest general resemblance between hybrids and mongrels, in
their variability, in their power of absorbing each other by repeated
crosses, and in their inheritance of characters from both parent-forms.
Finally, then, although we are as ignorant of the precise cause of the
sterility of first crosses and of hybrids as we are why animals and
plants removed from their natural conditions become sterile, yet the
facts given in this chapter do not seem to me opposed to the belief that
species aboriginally existed as varieties.




CHAPTER X. ON THE IMPERFECTION OF THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD.

 On the absence of intermediate varieties at the present day--On the
 nature of extinct intermediate varieties; on their number--On the lapse
 of time, as inferred from the rate of denudation and of deposition
 number--On the lapse of time as estimated by years--On the poorness of
 our palaeontological collections--On the intermittence of geological
 formations--On the denudation of granitic areas--On the absence of
 intermediate varieties in any one formation--On the sudden appearance
 of groups of species--On their sudden appearance in the lowest known
 fossiliferous strata--Antiquity of the habitable earth.


In the sixth chapter I enumerated the chief objections which might be
justly urged against the views maintained in this volume. Most of them
have now been discussed. One, namely, the distinctness of specific forms
and their not being blended together by innumerable transitional links,
is a very obvious difficulty. I assigned reasons why such links do not
commonly occur at the present day under the circumstances apparently
most favourable for their presence, namely, on an extensive and
continuous area with graduated physical conditions. I endeavoured to
show, that the life of each species depends in a more important manner
on the presence of other already defined organic forms, than on climate,
and, therefore, that the really governing conditions of life do not
graduate away quite insensibly like heat or moisture. I endeavoured,
also, to show that intermediate varieties, from existing in lesser
numbers than the forms which they connect, will generally be beaten
out and exterminated during the course of further modification and
improvement. The main cause, however, of innumerable intermediate links
not now occurring everywhere throughout nature depends, on the very
process of natural selection, through which new varieties continually
take the places of and supplant their parent-forms. But just in
proportion as this process of extermination has acted on an enormous
scale, so must the number of intermediate varieties, which have formerly
existed, be truly enormous. Why then is not every geological formation
and every stratum full of such intermediate links? Geology assuredly
does not reveal any such finely graduated organic chain; and this,
perhaps, is the most obvious and serious objection which can be urged
against my theory. The explanation lies, as I believe, in the extreme
imperfection of the geological record.

In the first place, it should always be borne in mind what sort of
intermediate forms must, on the theory, have formerly existed. I have
found it difficult, when looking at any two species, to avoid picturing
to myself forms DIRECTLY intermediate between them. But this is a wholly
false view; we should always look for forms intermediate between each
species and a common but unknown progenitor; and the progenitor
will generally have differed in some respects from all its modified
descendants. To give a simple illustration: the fantail and pouter
pigeons are both descended from the rock-pigeon; if we possessed all
the intermediate varieties which have ever existed, we should have an
extremely close series between both and the rock-pigeon; but we should
have no varieties directly intermediate between the fantail and pouter;
none, for instance, combining a tail somewhat expanded with a crop
somewhat enlarged, the characteristic features of these two breeds.
These two breeds, moreover, have become so much modified, that, if we
had no historical or indirect evidence regarding their origin, it would
not have been possible to have determined from a mere comparison of
their structure with that of the rock-pigeon, C. livia, whether they had
descended from this species or from some other allied species, such as
C. oenas.

So with natural species, if we look to forms very distinct, for instance
to the horse and tapir, we have no reason to suppose that links directly
intermediate between them ever existed, but between each and an unknown
common parent. The common parent will have had in its whole organisation
much general resemblance to the tapir and to the horse; but in some
points of structure may have differed considerably from both, even
perhaps more than they differ from each other. Hence, in all such cases,
we should be unable to recognise the parent-form of any two or more
species, even if we closely compared the structure of the parent with
that of its modified descendants, unless at the same time we had a
nearly perfect chain of the intermediate links.

It is just possible, by the theory, that one of two living forms might
have descended from the other; for instance, a horse from a tapir; and
in this case DIRECT intermediate links will have existed between them.
But such a case would imply that one form had remained for a very long
period unaltered, whilst its descendants had undergone a vast amount of
change; and the principle of competition between organism and organism,
between child and parent, will render this a very rare event; for in all
cases the new and improved forms of life tend to supplant the old and
unimproved forms.

By the theory of natural selection all living species have been
connected with the parent-species of each genus, by differences not
greater than we see between the natural and domestic varieties of the
same species at the present day; and these parent-species, now generally
extinct, have in their turn been similarly connected with more ancient
forms; and so on backwards, always converging to the common ancestor of
each great class. So that the number of intermediate and transitional
links, between all living and extinct species, must have been
inconceivably great. But assuredly, if this theory be true, such have
lived upon the earth.

ON THE LAPSE OF TIME, AS INFERRED FROM THE RATE OF DEPOSITION AND EXTENT
OF DENUDATION.

Independently of our not finding fossil remains of such infinitely
numerous connecting links, it may be objected that time cannot have
sufficed for so great an amount of organic change, all changes having
been effected slowly. It is hardly possible for me to recall to the
reader who is not a practical geologist, the facts leading the mind
feebly to comprehend the lapse of time. He who can read Sir Charles
Lyell's grand work on the Principles of Geology, which the future
historian will recognise as having produced a revolution in natural
science, and yet does not admit how vast have been the past periods of
time, may at once close this volume. Not that it suffices to study
the Principles of Geology, or to read special treatises by different
observers on separate formations, and to mark how each author attempts
to give an inadequate idea of the duration of each formation, or even
of each stratum. We can best gain some idea of past time by knowing the
agencies at work; and learning how deeply the surface of the land has
been denuded, and how much sediment has been deposited. As Lyell has
well remarked, the extent and thickness of our sedimentary formations
are the result and the measure of the denudation which the earth's crust
has elsewhere undergone. Therefore a man should examine for himself the
great piles of superimposed strata, and watch the rivulets bringing down
mud, and the waves wearing away the sea-cliffs, in order to comprehend
something about the duration of past time, the monuments of which we see
all around us.

It is good to wander along the coast, when formed of moderately hard
rocks, and mark the process of degradation. The tides in most cases
reach the cliffs only for a short time twice a day, and the waves eat
into them only when they are charged with sand or pebbles; for there is
good evidence that pure water effects nothing in wearing away rock. At
last the base of the cliff is undermined, huge fragments fall down, and
these remaining fixed, have to be worn away atom by atom, until after
being reduced in size they can be rolled about by the waves, and then
they are more quickly ground into pebbles, sand, or mud. But how often
do we see along the bases of retreating cliffs rounded boulders, all
thickly clothed by marine productions, showing how little they are
abraded and how seldom they are rolled about! Moreover, if we follow for
a few miles any line of rocky cliff, which is undergoing degradation,
we find that it is only here and there, along a short length or round
a promontory, that the cliffs are at the present time suffering. The
appearance of the surface and the vegetation show that elsewhere years
have elapsed since the waters washed their base.

We have, however, recently learned from the observations of Ramsay, in
the van of many excellent observers--of Jukes, Geikie, Croll and
others, that subaerial degradation is a much more important agency than
coast-action, or the power of the waves. The whole surface of the land
is exposed to the chemical action of the air and of the rainwater,
with its dissolved carbonic acid, and in colder countries to frost; the
disintegrated matter is carried down even gentle slopes during heavy
rain, and to a greater extent than might be supposed, especially in
arid districts, by the wind; it is then transported by the streams
and rivers, which, when rapid deepen their channels, and triturate the
fragments. On a rainy day, even in a gently undulating country, we see
the effects of subaerial degradation in the muddy rills which flow down
every slope. Messrs. Ramsay and Whitaker have shown, and the observation
is a most striking one, that the great lines of escarpment in the
Wealden district and those ranging across England, which formerly were
looked at as ancient sea-coasts, cannot have been thus formed, for each
line is composed of one and the same formation, while our sea-cliffs are
everywhere formed by the intersection of various formations. This being
the case, we are compelled to admit that the escarpments owe their
origin in chief part to the rocks of which they are composed, having
resisted subaerial denudation better than the surrounding surface;
this surface consequently has been gradually lowered, with the lines of
harder rock left projecting. Nothing impresses the mind with the vast
duration of time, according to our ideas of time, more forcibly than the
conviction thus gained that subaerial agencies, which apparently have
so little power, and which seem to work so slowly, have produced great
results.

When thus impressed with the slow rate at which the land is worn
away through subaerial and littoral action, it is good, in order to
appreciate the past duration of time, to consider, on the one hand, the
masses of rock which have been removed over many extensive areas, and on
the other hand the thickness of our sedimentary formations. I remember
having been much struck when viewing volcanic islands, which have been
worn by the waves and pared all round into perpendicular cliffs of
one or two thousand feet in height; for the gentle slope of the
lava-streams, due to their formerly liquid state, showed at a glance how
far the hard, rocky beds had once extended into the open ocean. The same
story is told still more plainly by faults--those great cracks along
which the strata have been upheaved on one side, or thrown down on the
other, to the height or depth of thousands of feet; for since the crust
cracked, and it makes no great difference whether the upheaval was
sudden, or, as most geologists now believe, was slow and effected by
many starts, the surface of the land has been so completely planed down
that no trace of these vast dislocations is externally visible. The
Craven fault, for instance, extends for upward of thirty miles, and
along this line the vertical displacement of the strata varies from 600
to 3,000 feet. Professor Ramsay has published an account of a downthrow
in Anglesea of 2,300 feet; and he informs me that he fully believes that
there is one in Merionethshire of 12,000 feet; yet in these cases there
is nothing on the surface of the land to show such prodigious movements;
the pile of rocks on either side of the crack having been smoothly swept
away.

On the other hand, in all parts of the world the piles of sedimentary
strata are of wonderful thickness. In the Cordillera, I estimated one
mass of conglomerate at ten thousand feet; and although conglomerates
have probably been accumulated at a quicker rate than finer sediments,
yet from being formed of worn and rounded pebbles, each of which bears
the stamp of time, they are good to show how slowly the mass must
have been heaped together. Professor Ramsay has given me the maximum
thickness, from actual measurement in most cases, of the successive
formations in DIFFERENT parts of Great Britain; and this is the
result:--

                                                  Feet

 Palaeozoic strata (not including igneous beds)..57,154
 Secondary strata................................13,190
 Tertiary strata..................................2,240

 --making altogether 72,584 feet;


that is, very nearly thirteen and three-quarters British miles.
Some of these formations, which are represented in England by thin beds,
are thousands of feet in thickness on the Continent. Moreover, between
each successive formation we have, in the opinion of most geologists,
blank periods of enormous length. So that the lofty pile of sedimentary
rocks in Britain gives but an inadequate idea of the time which has
elapsed during their accumulation. The consideration of these various
facts impresses the mind almost in the same manner as does the vain
endeavour to grapple with the idea of eternity.

Nevertheless this impression is partly false. Mr. Croll, in an
interesting paper, remarks that we do not err "in forming too great a
conception of the length of geological periods," but in estimating them
by years. When geologists look at large and complicated phenomena, and
then at the figures representing several million years, the two produce
a totally different effect on the mind, and the figures are at once
pronounced too small. In regard to subaerial denudation, Mr. Croll
shows, by calculating the known amount of sediment annually brought down
by certain rivers, relatively to their areas of drainage, that 1,000
feet of solid rock, as it became gradually disintegrated, would thus
be removed from the mean level of the whole area in the course of six
million years. This seems an astonishing result, and some considerations
lead to the suspicion that it may be too large, but if halved or
quartered it is still very surprising. Few of us, however, know what a
million really means: Mr. Croll gives the following illustration: Take
a narrow strip of paper, eighty-three feet four inches in length, and
stretch it along the wall of a large hall; then mark off at one end
the tenth of an inch. This tenth of an inch will represent one hundred
years, and the entire strip a million years. But let it be borne in
mind, in relation to the subject of this work, what a hundred years
implies, represented as it is by a measure utterly insignificant in a
hall of the above dimensions. Several eminent breeders, during a single
lifetime, have so largely modified some of the higher animals, which
propagate their kind much more slowly than most of the lower animals,
that they have formed what well deserves to be called a new sub-breed.
Few men have attended with due care to any one strain for more than half
a century, so that a hundred years represents the work of two breeders
in succession. It is not to be supposed that species in a state of
nature ever change so quickly as domestic animals under the guidance of
methodical selection. The comparison would be in every way fairer
with the effects which follow from unconscious selection, that is, the
preservation of the most useful or beautiful animals, with no intention
of modifying the breed; but by this process of unconscious selection,
various breeds have been sensibly changed in the course of two or three
centuries.

Species, however, probably change much more slowly, and within the same
country only a few change at the same time. This slowness follows from
all the inhabitants of the same country being already so well adapted to
each other, that new places in the polity of nature do not occur until
after long intervals, due to the occurrence of physical changes of some
kind, or through the immigration of new forms. Moreover, variations
or individual differences of the right nature, by which some of the
inhabitants might be better fitted to their new places under the altered
circumstance, would not always occur at once. Unfortunately we have no
means of determining, according to the standard of years, how long a
period it takes to modify a species; but to the subject of time we must
return.

ON THE POORNESS OF PALAEONTOLOGICAL COLLECTIONS.

Now let us turn to our richest museums, and what a paltry display we
behold! That our collections are imperfect is admitted by every one. The
remark of that admirable palaeontologist, Edward Forbes, should never
be forgotten, namely, that very many fossil species are known and
named from single and often broken specimens, or from a few specimens
collected on some one spot. Only a small portion of the surface of the
earth has been geologically explored, and no part with sufficient
care, as the important discoveries made every year in Europe prove.
No organism wholly soft can be preserved. Shells and bones decay and
disappear when left on the bottom of the sea, where sediment is not
accumulating. We probably take a quite erroneous view, when we assume
that sediment is being deposited over nearly the whole bed of the sea,
at a rate sufficiently quick to embed and preserve fossil remains.
Throughout an enormously large proportion of the ocean, the bright blue
tint of the water bespeaks its purity. The many cases on record of a
formation conformably covered, after an immense interval of time, by
another and later formation, without the underlying bed having suffered
in the interval any wear and tear, seem explicable only on the view
of the bottom of the sea not rarely lying for ages in an unaltered
condition. The remains which do become embedded, if in sand or gravel,
will, when the beds are upraised, generally be dissolved by the
percolation of rain water charged with carbonic acid. Some of the many
kinds of animals which live on the beach between high and low water mark
seem to be rarely preserved. For instance, the several species of the
Chthamalinae (a sub-family of sessile cirripedes) coat the rocks all
over the world in infinite numbers: they are all strictly littoral, with
the exception of a single Mediterranean species, which inhabits deep
water and this has been found fossil in Sicily, whereas not one other
species has hitherto been found in any tertiary formation: yet it is
known that the genus Chthamalus existed during the Chalk period.
Lastly, many great deposits, requiring a vast length of time for their
accumulation, are entirely destitute of organic remains, without our
being able to assign any reason: one of the most striking instances is
that of the Flysch formation, which consists of shale and sandstone,
several thousand, occasionally even six thousand feet in thickness,
and extending for at least 300 miles from Vienna to Switzerland; and
although this great mass has been most carefully searched, no fossils,
except a few vegetable remains, have been found.

With respect to the terrestrial productions which lived during the
Secondary and Palaeozoic periods, it is superfluous to state that
our evidence is fragmentary in an extreme degree. For instance, until
recently not a land-shell was known belonging to either of these vast
periods, with the exception of one species discovered by Sir C. Lyell
and Dr. Dawson in the carboniferous strata of North America; but now
land-shells have been found in the lias. In regard to mammiferous
remains, a glance at the historical table published in Lyell's
Manual, will bring home the truth, how accidental and rare is their
preservation, far better than pages of detail. Nor is their rarity
surprising, when we remember how large a proportion of the bones of
tertiary mammals have been discovered either in caves or in lacustrine
deposits; and that not a cave or true lacustrine bed is known belonging
to the age of our secondary or palaeozoic formations.

But the imperfection in the geological record largely results from
another and more important cause than any of the foregoing; namely, from
the several formations being separated from each other by wide intervals
of time. This doctrine has been emphatically admitted by many geologists
and palaeontologists, who, like E. Forbes, entirely disbelieve in the
change of species. When we see the formations tabulated in written
works, or when we follow them in nature, it is difficult to avoid
believing that they are closely consecutive. But we know, for instance,
from Sir R. Murchison's great work on Russia, what wide gaps there are
in that country between the superimposed formations; so it is in
North America, and in many other parts of the world. The most skilful
geologist, if his attention had been confined exclusively to these large
territories, would never have suspected that during the periods which
were blank and barren in his own country, great piles of sediment,
charged with new and peculiar forms of life, had elsewhere been
accumulated. And if, in every separate territory, hardly any idea can be
formed of the length of time which has elapsed between the consecutive
formations, we may infer that this could nowhere be ascertained.
The frequent and great changes in the mineralogical composition
of consecutive formations, generally implying great changes in the
geography of the surrounding lands, whence the sediment was derived,
accord with the belief of vast intervals of time having elapsed between
each formation.

We can, I think, see why the geological formations of each region are
almost invariably intermittent; that is, have not followed each other
in close sequence. Scarcely any fact struck me more when examining many
hundred miles of the South American coasts, which have been upraised
several hundred feet within the recent period, than the absence of
any recent deposits sufficiently extensive to last for even a short
geological period. Along the whole west coast, which is inhabited by
a peculiar marine fauna, tertiary beds are so poorly developed that no
record of several successive and peculiar marine faunas will probably be
preserved to a distant age. A little reflection will explain why, along
the rising coast of the western side of South America, no extensive
formations with recent or tertiary remains can anywhere be found, though
the supply of sediment must for ages have been great, from the enormous
degradation of the coast rocks and from the muddy streams entering the
sea. The explanation, no doubt, is that the littoral and sub-littoral
deposits are continually worn away, as soon as they are brought up by
the slow and gradual rising of the land within the grinding action of
the coast-waves.

We may, I think, conclude that sediment must be accumulated in extremely
thick, solid, or extensive masses, in order to withstand the incessant
action of the waves, when first upraised and during subsequent
oscillations of level, as well as the subsequent subaerial degradation.
Such thick and extensive accumulations of sediment may be formed in two
ways; either in profound depths of the sea, in which case the bottom
will not be inhabited by so many and such varied forms of life as the
more shallow seas; and the mass when upraised will give an imperfect
record of the organisms which existed in the neighbourhood during
the period of its accumulation. Or sediment may be deposited to any
thickness and extent over a shallow bottom, if it continue slowly to
subside. In this latter case, as long as the rate of subsidence and
supply of sediment nearly balance each other, the sea will remain
shallow and favourable for many and varied forms, and thus a rich
fossiliferous formation, thick enough, when upraised, to resist a large
amount of denudation, may be formed.

I am convinced that nearly all our ancient formations, which are
throughout the greater part of their thickness RICH IN FOSSILS, have
thus been formed during subsidence. Since publishing my views on this
subject in 1845, I have watched the progress of geology, and have been
surprised to note how author after author, in treating of this or that
great formation, has come to the conclusion that it was accumulated
during subsidence. I may add, that the only ancient tertiary formation
on the west coast of South America, which has been bulky enough to
resist such degradation as it has as yet suffered, but which will
hardly last to a distant geological age, was deposited during a downward
oscillation of level, and thus gained considerable thickness.

All geological facts tell us plainly that each area has undergone
numerous slow oscillations of level, and apparently these oscillations
have affected wide spaces. Consequently, formations rich in fossils and
sufficiently thick and extensive to resist subsequent degradation, will
have been formed over wide spaces during periods of subsidence, but only
where the supply of sediment was sufficient to keep the sea shallow and
to embed and preserve the remains before they had time to decay. On the
other hand, as long as the bed of the sea remained stationary, THICK
deposits cannot have been accumulated in the shallow parts, which are
the most favourable to life. Still less can this have happened during
the alternate periods of elevation; or, to speak more accurately, the
beds which were then accumulated will generally have been destroyed by
being upraised and brought within the limits of the coast-action.

These remarks apply chiefly to littoral and sublittoral deposits. In the
case of an extensive and shallow sea, such as that within a large part
of the Malay Archipelago, where the depth varies from thirty or forty
to sixty fathoms, a widely extended formation might be formed during
a period of elevation, and yet not suffer excessively from denudation
during its slow upheaval; but the thickness of the formation could not
be great, for owing to the elevatory movement it would be less than
the depth in which it was formed; nor would the deposit be much
consolidated, nor be capped by overlying formations, so that it would
run a good chance of being worn away by atmospheric degradation and by
the action of the sea during subsequent oscillations of level. It has,
however, been suggested by Mr. Hopkins, that if one part of the area,
after rising and before being denuded, subsided, the deposit formed
during the rising movement, though not thick, might afterwards become
protected by fresh accumulations, and thus be preserved for a long
period.

Mr. Hopkins also expresses his belief that sedimentary beds of
considerable horizontal extent have rarely been completely destroyed.
But all geologists, excepting the few who believe that our present
metamorphic schists and plutonic rocks once formed the primordial
nucleus of the globe, will admit that these latter rocks have been
stripped of their covering to an enormous extent. For it is scarcely
possible that such rocks could have been solidified and crystallised
while uncovered; but if the metamorphic action occurred at profound
depths of the ocean, the former protecting mantle of rock may not have
been very thick. Admitting then that gneiss, mica-schist, granite,
diorite, etc., were once necessarily covered up, how can we account for
the naked and extensive areas of such rocks in many parts of the world,
except on the belief that they have subsequently been completely denuded
of all overlying strata? That such extensive areas do exist cannot be
doubted: the granitic region of Parime is described by Humboldt as being
at least nineteen times as large as Switzerland. South of the Amazon,
Boue colours an area composed of rocks of this nature as equal to that
of Spain, France, Italy, part of Germany, and the British Islands, all
conjoined. This region has not been carefully explored, but from the
concurrent testimony of travellers, the granitic area is very large:
thus Von Eschwege gives a detailed section of these rocks, stretching
from Rio de Janeiro for 260 geographical miles inland in a straight
line; and I travelled for 150 miles in another direction, and saw
nothing but granitic rocks. Numerous specimens, collected along the
whole coast, from near Rio de Janeiro to the mouth of the Plata, a
distance of 1,100 geographical miles, were examined by me, and they all
belonged to this class. Inland, along the whole northern bank of the
Plata, I saw, besides modern tertiary beds, only one small patch of
slightly metamorphosed rock, which alone could have formed a part of the
original capping of the granitic series. Turning to a well-known region,
namely, to the United States and Canada, as shown in Professor H.D.
Rogers' beautiful map, I have estimated the areas by cutting out and
weighing the paper, and I find that the metamorphic (excluding the
"semi-metamorphic") and granite rocks exceed, in the proportion of 19 to
12.5, the whole of the newer Palaeozoic formations. In many regions the
metamorphic and granite rocks would be found much more widely extended
than they appear to be, if all the sedimentary beds were removed which
rest unconformably on them, and which could not have formed part of
the original mantle under which they were crystallised. Hence, it is
probable that in some parts of the world whole formations have been
completely denuded, with not a wreck left behind.


One remark is here worth a passing notice. During periods of elevation
the area of the land and of the adjoining shoal parts of the sea will
be increased and new stations will often be formed--all circumstances
favourable, as previously explained, for the formation of new varieties
and species; but during such periods there will generally be a blank
in the geological record. On the other hand, during subsidence, the
inhabited area and number of inhabitants will decrease (excepting on
the shores of a continent when first broken up into an archipelago), and
consequently during subsidence, though there will be much extinction,
few new varieties or species will be formed; and it is during these very
periods of subsidence that the deposits which are richest in fossils
have been accumulated.

ON THE ABSENCE OF NUMEROUS INTERMEDIATE VARIETIES IN ANY SINGLE
FORMATION.

From these several considerations it cannot be doubted that the
geological record, viewed as a whole, is extremely imperfect; but if
we confine our attention to any one formation, it becomes much more
difficult to understand why we do not therein find closely graduated
varieties between the allied species which lived at its commencement and
at its close. Several cases are on record of the same species presenting
varieties in the upper and lower parts of the same formation. Thus
Trautschold gives a number of instances with Ammonites, and Hilgendorf
has described a most curious case of ten graduated forms of Planorbis
multiformis in the successive beds of a fresh-water formation in
Switzerland. Although each formation has indisputably required a vast
number of years for its deposition, several reasons can be given why
each should not commonly include a graduated series of links between the
species which lived at its commencement and close, but I cannot assign
due proportional weight to the following considerations.

Although each formation may mark a very long lapse of years, each
probably is short compared with the period requisite to change one
species into another. I am aware that two palaeontologists, whose
opinions are worthy of much deference, namely Bronn and Woodward, have
concluded that the average duration of each formation is twice or thrice
as long as the average duration of specific forms. But insuperable
difficulties, as it seems to me, prevent us from coming to any just
conclusion on this head. When we see a species first appearing in the
middle of any formation, it would be rash in the extreme to infer
that it had not elsewhere previously existed. So again, when we find
a species disappearing before the last layers have been deposited, it
would be equally rash to suppose that it then became extinct. We forget
how small the area of Europe is compared with the rest of the world;
nor have the several stages of the same formation throughout Europe been
correlated with perfect accuracy.

We may safely infer that with marine animals of all kinds there has been
a large amount of migration due to climatal and other changes; and when
we see a species first appearing in any formation, the probability is
that it only then first immigrated into that area. It is well known, for
instance, that several species appear somewhat earlier in the palaeozoic
beds of North America than in those of Europe; time having apparently
been required for their migration from the American to the European
seas. In examining the latest deposits, in various quarters of the
world, it has everywhere been noted, that some few still existing
species are common in the deposit, but have become extinct in the
immediately surrounding sea; or, conversely, that some are now abundant
in the neighbouring sea, but are rare or absent in this particular
deposit. It is an excellent lesson to reflect on the ascertained amount
of migration of the inhabitants of Europe during the glacial epoch,
which forms only a part of one whole geological period; and likewise to
reflect on the changes of level, on the extreme change of climate,
and on the great lapse of time, all included within this same glacial
period. Yet it may be doubted whether, in any quarter of the
world, sedimentary deposits, INCLUDING FOSSIL REMAINS, have gone on
accumulating within the same area during the whole of this period. It is
not, for instance, probable that sediment was deposited during the whole
of the glacial period near the mouth of the Mississippi, within that
limit of depth at which marine animals can best flourish: for we know
that great geographical changes occurred in other parts of America
during this space of time. When such beds as were deposited in shallow
water near the mouth of the Mississippi during some part of the glacial
period shall have been upraised, organic remains will probably first
appear and disappear at different levels, owing to the migrations
of species and to geographical changes. And in the distant future, a
geologist, examining these beds, would be tempted to conclude that the
average duration of life of the embedded fossils had been less than that
of the glacial period, instead of having been really far greater, that
is, extending from before the glacial epoch to the present day.

In order to get a perfect gradation between two forms in the upper
and lower parts of the same formation, the deposit must have gone on
continuously accumulating during a long period, sufficient for the slow
process of modification; hence, the deposit must be a very thick one;
and the species undergoing change must have lived in the same district
throughout the whole time. But we have seen that a thick formation,
fossiliferous throughout its entire thickness, can accumulate only
during a period of subsidence; and to keep the depth approximately the
same, which is necessary that the same marine species may live on the
same space, the supply of sediment must nearly counterbalance the
amount of subsidence. But this same movement of subsidence will tend to
submerge the area whence the sediment is derived, and thus diminish the
supply, whilst the downward movement continues. In fact, this nearly
exact balancing between the supply of sediment and the amount of
subsidence is probably a rare contingency; for it has been observed
by more than one palaeontologist that very thick deposits are usually
barren of organic remains, except near their upper or lower limits.

It would seem that each separate formation, like the whole pile of
formations in any country, has generally been intermittent in its
accumulation. When we see, as is so often the case, a formation composed
of beds of widely different mineralogical composition, we may
reasonably suspect that the process of deposition has been more or less
interrupted. Nor will the closest inspection of a formation give us any
idea of the length of time which its deposition may have consumed.
Many instances could be given of beds, only a few feet in thickness,
representing formations which are elsewhere thousands of feet in
thickness, and which must have required an enormous period for their
accumulation; yet no one ignorant of this fact would have even suspected
the vast lapse of time represented by the thinner formation. Many cases
could be given of the lower beds of a formation having been upraised,
denuded, submerged, and then re-covered by the upper beds of the same
formation--facts, showing what wide, yet easily overlooked, intervals
have occurred in its accumulation. In other cases we have the plainest
evidence in great fossilised trees, still standing upright as they grew,
of many long intervals of time and changes of level during the process
of deposition, which would not have been suspected, had not the trees
been preserved: thus Sir C. Lyell and Dr. Dawson found carboniferous
beds 1,400 feet thick in Nova Scotia, with ancient root-bearing strata,
one above the other, at no less than sixty-eight different levels.
Hence, when the same species occurs at the bottom, middle, and top of
a formation, the probability is that it has not lived on the same
spot during the whole period of deposition, but has disappeared and
reappeared, perhaps many times, during the same geological period.
Consequently if it were to undergo a considerable amount of modification
during the deposition of any one geological formation, a section would
not include all the fine intermediate gradations which must on our
theory have existed, but abrupt, though perhaps slight, changes of form.

It is all-important to remember that naturalists have no golden rule
by which to distinguish species and varieties; they grant some little
variability to each species, but when they meet with a somewhat greater
amount of difference between any two forms, they rank both as species,
unless they are enabled to connect them together by the closest
intermediate gradations; and this, from the reasons just assigned, we
can seldom hope to effect in any one geological section. Supposing B
and C to be two species, and a third, A, to be found in an older and
underlying bed; even if A were strictly intermediate between B and C,
it would simply be ranked as a third and distinct species, unless at the
same time it could be closely connected by intermediate varieties
with either one or both forms. Nor should it be forgotten, as before
explained, that A might be the actual progenitor of B and C, and yet
would not necessarily be strictly intermediate between them in all
respects. So that we might obtain the parent-species and its several
modified descendants from the lower and upper beds of the same
formation, and unless we obtained numerous transitional gradations, we
should not recognise their blood-relationship, and should consequently
rank them as distinct species.

It is notorious on what excessively slight differences many
palaeontologists have founded their species; and they do this the more
readily if the specimens come from different sub-stages of the same
formation. Some experienced conchologists are now sinking many of the
very fine species of D'Orbigny and others into the rank of varieties;
and on this view we do find the kind of evidence of change which on
the theory we ought to find. Look again at the later tertiary deposits,
which include many shells believed by the majority of naturalists to
be identical with existing species; but some excellent naturalists,
as Agassiz and Pictet, maintain that all these tertiary species are
specifically distinct, though the distinction is admitted to be very
slight; so that here, unless we believe that these eminent naturalists
have been misled by their imaginations, and that these late tertiary
species really present no difference whatever from their living
representatives, or unless we admit, in opposition to the judgment of
most naturalists, that these tertiary species are all truly distinct
from the recent, we have evidence of the frequent occurrence of slight
modifications of the kind required. If we look to rather wider intervals
of time, namely, to distinct but consecutive stages of the same great
formation, we find that the embedded fossils, though universally ranked
as specifically different, yet are far more closely related to each
other than are the species found in more widely separated formations;
so that here again we have undoubted evidence of change in the direction
required by the theory; but to this latter subject I shall return in the
following chapter.

With animals and plants that propagate rapidly and do not wander
much, there is reason to suspect, as we have formerly seen, that their
varieties are generally at first local; and that such local varieties
do not spread widely and supplant their parent-form until they have been
modified and perfected in some considerable degree. According to this
view, the chance of discovering in a formation in any one country all
the early stages of transition between any two forms, is small, for the
successive changes are supposed to have been local or confined to some
one spot. Most marine animals have a wide range; and we have seen that
with plants it is those which have the widest range, that oftenest
present varieties, so that, with shells and other marine animals, it is
probable that those which had the widest range, far exceeding the limits
of the known geological formations in Europe, have oftenest given rise,
first to local varieties and ultimately to new species; and this again
would greatly lessen the chance of our being able to trace the stages of
transition in any one geological formation.

It is a more important consideration, leading to the same result, as
lately insisted on by Dr. Falconer, namely, that the period during which
each species underwent modification, though long as measured by years,
was probably short in comparison with that during which it remained
without undergoing any change.

It should not be forgotten, that at the present day, with perfect
specimens for examination, two forms can seldom be connected by
intermediate varieties, and thus proved to be the same species, until
many specimens are collected from many places; and with fossil
species this can rarely be done. We shall, perhaps, best perceive the
improbability of our being enabled to connect species by numerous, fine,
intermediate, fossil links, by asking ourselves whether, for instance,
geologists at some future period will be able to prove that our
different breeds of cattle, sheep, horses, and dogs are descended from
a single stock or from several aboriginal stocks; or, again, whether
certain sea-shells inhabiting the shores of North America, which are
ranked by some conchologists as distinct species from their European
representatives, and by other conchologists as only varieties, are
really varieties, or are, as it is called, specifically distinct. This
could be effected by the future geologist only by his discovering in
a fossil state numerous intermediate gradations; and such success is
improbable in the highest degree.

It has been asserted over and over again, by writers who believe in
the immutability of species, that geology yields no linking forms. This
assertion, as we shall see in the next chapter, is certainly erroneous.
As Sir J. Lubbock has remarked, "Every species is a link between other
allied forms." If we take a genus having a score of species, recent
and extinct, and destroy four-fifths of them, no one doubts that the
remainder will stand much more distinct from each other. If the extreme
forms in the genus happen to have been thus destroyed, the genus itself
will stand more distinct from other allied genera. What geological
research has not revealed, is the former existence of infinitely
numerous gradations, as fine as existing varieties, connecting together
nearly all existing and extinct species. But this ought not to be
expected; yet this has been repeatedly advanced as a most serious
objection against my views.

It may be worth while to sum up the foregoing remarks on the causes
of the imperfection of the geological record under an imaginary
illustration. The Malay Archipelago is about the size of Europe from
the North Cape to the Mediterranean, and from Britain to Russia; and
therefore equals all the geological formations which have been examined
with any accuracy, excepting those of the United States of America. I
fully agree with Mr. Godwin-Austen, that the present condition of the
Malay Archipelago, with its numerous large islands separated by wide and
shallow seas, probably represents the former state of Europe, while most
of our formations were accumulating. The Malay Archipelago is one of
the richest regions in organic beings; yet if all the species were to
be collected which have ever lived there, how imperfectly would they
represent the natural history of the world!

But we have every reason to believe that the terrestrial productions of
the archipelago would be preserved in an extremely imperfect manner in
the formations which we suppose to be there accumulating. Not many
of the strictly littoral animals, or of those which lived on naked
submarine rocks, would be embedded; and those embedded in gravel or
sand would not endure to a distant epoch. Wherever sediment did not
accumulate on the bed of the sea, or where it did not accumulate at a
sufficient rate to protect organic bodies from decay, no remains could
be preserved.

Formations rich in fossils of many kinds, and of thickness sufficient to
last to an age as distant in futurity as the secondary formations lie
in the past, would generally be formed in the archipelago only during
periods of subsidence. These periods of subsidence would be separated
from each other by immense intervals of time, during which the area
would be either stationary or rising; whilst rising, the fossiliferous
formations on the steeper shores would be destroyed, almost as soon as
accumulated, by the incessant coast-action, as we now see on the shores
of South America. Even throughout the extensive and shallow seas within
the archipelago, sedimentary beds could hardly be accumulated of
great thickness during the periods of elevation, or become capped
and protected by subsequent deposits, so as to have a good chance of
enduring to a very distant future. During the periods of subsidence,
there would probably be much extinction of life; during the periods
of elevation, there would be much variation, but the geological record
would then be less perfect.

It may be doubted whether the duration of any one great period of
subsidence over the whole or part of the archipelago, together with
a contemporaneous accumulation of sediment, would EXCEED the average
duration of the same specific forms; and these contingencies are
indispensable for the preservation of all the transitional gradations
between any two or more species. If such gradations were not all fully
preserved, transitional varieties would merely appear as so many new,
though closely allied species. It is also probable that each great
period of subsidence would be interrupted by oscillations of level,
and that slight climatical changes would intervene during such lengthy
periods; and in these cases the inhabitants of the archipelago would
migrate, and no closely consecutive record of their modifications could
be preserved in any one formation.

Very many of the marine inhabitants of the archipelago now range
thousands of miles beyond its confines; and analogy plainly leads to the
belief that it would be chiefly these far-ranging species, though
only some of them, which would oftenest produce new varieties; and
the varieties would at first be local or confined to one place, but
if possessed of any decided advantage, or when further modified and
improved, they would slowly spread and supplant their parent-forms. When
such varieties returned to their ancient homes, as they would differ
from their former state in a nearly uniform, though perhaps extremely
slight degree, and as they would be found embedded in slightly
different sub-stages of the same formation, they would, according to
the principles followed by many palaeontologists, be ranked as new and
distinct species.

If then there be some degree of truth in these remarks, we have no right
to expect to find, in our geological formations, an infinite number of
those fine transitional forms, which, on our theory, have connected
all the past and present species of the same group into one long and
branching chain of life. We ought only to look for a few links, and such
assuredly we do find--some more distantly, some more closely, related
to each other; and these links, let them be ever so close, if found in
different stages of the same formation, would, by many palaeontologists,
be ranked as distinct species. But I do not pretend that I should ever
have suspected how poor was the record in the best preserved geological
sections, had not the absence of innumerable transitional links between
the species which lived at the commencement and close of each formation,
pressed so hardly on my theory.

ON THE SUDDEN APPEARANCE OF WHOLE GROUPS OF ALLIED SPECIES.

The abrupt manner in which whole groups of species suddenly appear in
certain formations, has been urged by several palaeontologists--for
instance, by Agassiz, Pictet, and Sedgwick, as a fatal objection to the
belief in the transmutation of species. If numerous species, belonging
to the same genera or families, have really started into life at once,
the fact would be fatal to the theory of evolution through natural
selection. For the development by this means of a group of forms, all
of which are descended from some one progenitor, must have been an
extremely slow process; and the progenitors must have lived long before
their modified descendants. But we continually overrate the perfection
of the geological record, and falsely infer, because certain genera or
families have not been found beneath a certain stage, that they did not
exist before that stage. In all cases positive palaeontological evidence
may be implicitly trusted; negative evidence is worthless, as experience
has so often shown. We continually forget how large the world is,
compared with the area over which our geological formations have been
carefully examined; we forget that groups of species may elsewhere
have long existed, and have slowly multiplied, before they invaded the
ancient archipelagoes of Europe and the United States. We do not make
due allowance for the enormous intervals of time which have elapsed
between our consecutive formations, longer perhaps in many cases
than the time required for the accumulation of each formation. These
intervals will have given time for the multiplication of species from
some one parent-form: and in the succeeding formation, such groups or
species will appear as if suddenly created.

I may here recall a remark formerly made, namely, that it might require
a long succession of ages to adapt an organism to some new and peculiar
line of life, for instance, to fly through the air; and consequently
that the transitional forms would often long remain confined to some one
region; but that, when this adaptation had once been effected, and a
few species had thus acquired a great advantage over other organisms,
a comparatively short time would be necessary to produce many divergent
forms, which would spread rapidly and widely throughout the world.
Professor Pictet, in his excellent Review of this work, in commenting
on early transitional forms, and taking birds as an illustration, cannot
see how the successive modifications of the anterior limbs of a supposed
prototype could possibly have been of any advantage. But look at the
penguins of the Southern Ocean; have not these birds their front limbs
in this precise intermediate state of "neither true arms nor true
wings?" Yet these birds hold their place victoriously in the battle for
life; for they exist in infinite numbers and of many kinds. I do not
suppose that we here see the real transitional grades through which
the wings of birds have passed; but what special difficulty is there in
believing that it might profit the modified descendants of the penguin,
first to become enabled to flap along the surface of the sea like the
logger-headed duck, and ultimately to rise from its surface and glide
through the air?

I will now give a few examples to illustrate the foregoing remarks, and
to show how liable we are to error in supposing that whole groups of
species have suddenly been produced. Even in so short an interval as
that between the first and second editions of Pictet's great work on
Palaeontology, published in 1844-46 and in 1853-57, the conclusions on
the first appearance and disappearance of several groups of animals
have been considerably modified; and a third edition would require still
further changes. I may recall the well-known fact that in geological
treatises, published not many years ago, mammals were always spoken of
as having abruptly come in at the commencement of the tertiary series.
And now one of the richest known accumulations of fossil mammals belongs
to the middle of the secondary series; and true mammals have been
discovered in the new red sandstone at nearly the commencement of
this great series. Cuvier used to urge that no monkey occurred in any
tertiary stratum; but now extinct species have been discovered in India,
South America and in Europe, as far back as the miocene stage. Had it
not been for the rare accident of the preservation of footsteps in
the new red sandstone of the United States, who would have ventured to
suppose that no less than at least thirty different bird-like animals,
some of gigantic size, existed during that period? Not a fragment of
bone has been discovered in these beds. Not long ago, palaeontologists
maintained that the whole class of birds came suddenly into existence
during the eocene period; but now we know, on the authority of Professor
Owen, that a bird certainly lived during the deposition of the upper
greensand; and still more recently, that strange bird, the Archeopteryx,
with a long lizard-like tail, bearing a pair of feathers on each joint,
and with its wings furnished with two free claws, has been discovered in
the oolitic slates of Solenhofen. Hardly any recent discovery shows more
forcibly than this how little we as yet know of the former inhabitants
of the world.

I may give another instance, which, from having passed under my own eyes
has much struck me. In a memoir on Fossil Sessile Cirripedes, I stated
that, from the large number of existing and extinct tertiary species;
from the extraordinary abundance of the individuals of many species
all over the world, from the Arctic regions to the equator, inhabiting
various zones of depths, from the upper tidal limits to fifty fathoms;
from the perfect manner in which specimens are preserved in the oldest
tertiary beds; from the ease with which even a fragment of a valve
can be recognised; from all these circumstances, I inferred that, had
sessile cirripedes existed during the secondary periods, they would
certainly have been preserved and discovered; and as not one species had
then been discovered in beds of this age, I concluded that this great
group had been suddenly developed at the commencement of the tertiary
series. This was a sore trouble to me, adding, as I then thought, one
more instance of the abrupt appearance of a great group of species. But
my work had hardly been published, when a skilful palaeontologist, M.
Bosquet, sent me a drawing of a perfect specimen of an unmistakable
sessile cirripede, which he had himself extracted from the chalk of
Belgium. And, as if to make the case as striking as possible, this
cirripede was a Chthamalus, a very common, large, and ubiquitous genus,
of which not one species has as yet been found even in any tertiary
stratum. Still more recently, a Pyrgoma, a member of a distinct
subfamily of sessile cirripedes, has been discovered by Mr. Woodward in
the upper chalk; so that we now have abundant evidence of the existence
of this group of animals during the secondary period.

The case most frequently insisted on by palaeontologists of the
apparently sudden appearance of a whole group of species, is that of the
teleostean fishes, low down, according to Agassiz, in the Chalk period.
This group includes the large majority of existing species. But certain
Jurassic and Triassic forms are now commonly admitted to be teleostean;
and even some palaeozoic forms have thus been classed by one high
authority. If the teleosteans had really appeared suddenly in the
northern hemisphere at the commencement of the chalk formation, the
fact would have been highly remarkable; but it would not have formed an
insuperable difficulty, unless it could likewise have been shown that at
the same period the species were suddenly and simultaneously developed
in other quarters of the world. It is almost superfluous to remark
that hardly any fossil-fish are known from south of the equator; and
by running through Pictet's Palaeontology it will be seen that very few
species are known from several formations in Europe. Some few families
of fish now have a confined range; the teleostean fishes might formerly
have had a similarly confined range, and after having been largely
developed in some one sea, have spread widely. Nor have we any right to
suppose that the seas of the world have always been so freely open from
south to north as they are at present. Even at this day, if the Malay
Archipelago were converted into land, the tropical parts of the Indian
Ocean would form a large and perfectly enclosed basin, in which any
great group of marine animals might be multiplied; and here they would
remain confined, until some of the species became adapted to a cooler
climate, and were enabled to double the southern capes of Africa or
Australia, and thus reach other and distant seas.

From these considerations, from our ignorance of the geology of other
countries beyond the confines of Europe and the United States, and
from the revolution in our palaeontological knowledge effected by the
discoveries of the last dozen years, it seems to me to be about as rash
to dogmatize on the succession of organic forms throughout the world, as
it would be for a naturalist to land for five minutes on a barren
point in Australia, and then to discuss the number and range of its
productions.

ON THE SUDDEN APPEARANCE OF GROUPS OF ALLIED SPECIES IN THE LOWEST KNOWN
FOSSILIFEROUS STRATA.

There is another and allied difficulty, which is much more serious. I
allude to the manner in which species belonging to several of the main
divisions of the animal kingdom suddenly appear in the lowest known
fossiliferous rocks. Most of the arguments which have convinced me that
all the existing species of the same group are descended from a single
progenitor, apply with equal force to the earliest known species.
For instance, it cannot be doubted that all the Cambrian and Silurian
trilobites are descended from some one crustacean, which must have lived
long before the Cambrian age, and which probably differed greatly from
any known animal. Some of the most ancient animals, as the Nautilus,
Lingula, etc., do not differ much from living species; and it cannot on
our theory be supposed, that these old species were the progenitors of
all the species belonging to the same groups which have subsequently
appeared, for they are not in any degree intermediate in character.

Consequently, if the theory be true, it is indisputable that before the
lowest Cambrian stratum was deposited long periods elapsed, as long as,
or probably far longer than, the whole interval from the Cambrian age
to the present day; and that during these vast periods the world swarmed
with living creatures. Here we encounter a formidable objection; for it
seems doubtful whether the earth, in a fit state for the habitation of
living creatures, has lasted long enough. Sir W. Thompson concludes that
the consolidation of the crust can hardly have occurred less than twenty
or more than four hundred million years ago, but probably not less than
ninety-eight or more than two hundred million years. These very wide
limits show how doubtful the data are; and other elements may have
hereafter to be introduced into the problem. Mr. Croll estimates that
about sixty million years have elapsed since the Cambrian period,
but this, judging from the small amount of organic change since the
commencement of the Glacial epoch, appears a very short time for the
many and great mutations of life, which have certainly occurred since
the Cambrian formation; and the previous one hundred and forty million
years can hardly be considered as sufficient for the development of the
varied forms of life which already existed during the Cambrian period.
It is, however, probable, as Sir William Thompson insists, that the
world at a very early period was subjected to more rapid and violent
changes in its physical conditions than those now occurring; and such
changes would have tended to induce changes at a corresponding rate in
the organisms which then existed.

To the question why we do not find rich fossiliferous deposits belonging
to these assumed earliest periods prior to the Cambrian system, I can
give no satisfactory answer. Several eminent geologists, with Sir R.
Murchison at their head, were until recently convinced that we beheld
in the organic remains of the lowest Silurian stratum the first dawn
of life. Other highly competent judges, as Lyell and E. Forbes, have
disputed this conclusion. We should not forget that only a small portion
of the world is known with accuracy. Not very long ago M. Barrande
added another and lower stage, abounding with new and peculiar species,
beneath the then known Silurian system; and now, still lower down in the
Lower Cambrian formation, Mr Hicks has found South Wales beds rich in
trilobites, and containing various molluscs and annelids. The presence
of phosphatic nodules and bituminous matter, even in some of the
lowest azotic rocks, probably indicates life at these periods; and
the existence of the Eozoon in the Laurentian formation of Canada is
generally admitted. There are three great series of strata beneath the
Silurian system in Canada, in the lowest of which the Eozoon is found.
Sir W. Logan states that their "united thickness may possibly far
surpass that of all the succeeding rocks, from the base of the
palaeozoic series to the present time. We are thus carried back to a
period so remote, that the appearance of the so-called primordial
fauna (of Barrande) may by some be considered as a comparatively modern
event." The Eozoon belongs to the most lowly organised of all classes of
animals, but is highly organised for its class; it existed in countless
numbers, and, as Dr. Dawson has remarked, certainly preyed on other
minute organic beings, which must have lived in great numbers. Thus the
words, which I wrote in 1859, about the existence of living beings long
before the Cambrian period, and which are almost the same with those
since used by Sir W. Logan, have proved true. Nevertheless, the
difficulty of assigning any good reason for the absence of vast piles
of strata rich in fossils beneath the Cambrian system is very great. It
does not seem probable that the most ancient beds have been quite worn
away by denudation, or that their fossils have been wholly obliterated
by metamorphic action, for if this had been the case we should have
found only small remnants of the formations next succeeding them in
age, and these would always have existed in a partially metamorphosed
condition. But the descriptions which we possess of the Silurian
deposits over immense territories in Russia and in North America, do not
support the view that the older a formation is the more invariably it
has suffered extreme denudation and metamorphism.

The case at present must remain inexplicable; and may be truly urged as
a valid argument against the views here entertained. To show that it
may hereafter receive some explanation, I will give the following
hypothesis. From the nature of the organic remains which do not appear
to have inhabited profound depths, in the several formations of Europe
and of the United States; and from the amount of sediment, miles in
thickness, of which the formations are composed, we may infer that from
first to last large islands or tracts of land, whence the sediment was
derived, occurred in the neighbourhood of the now existing continents
of Europe and North America. This same view has since been maintained by
Agassiz and others. But we do not know what was the state of things in
the intervals between the several successive formations; whether Europe
and the United States during these intervals existed as dry land, or as
a submarine surface near land, on which sediment was not deposited, or
as the bed of an open and unfathomable sea.

Looking to the existing oceans, which are thrice as extensive as the
land, we see them studded with many islands; but hardly one truly
oceanic island (with the exception of New Zealand, if this can be called
a truly oceanic island) is as yet known to afford even a remnant of any
palaeozoic or secondary formation. Hence, we may perhaps infer, that
during the palaeozoic and secondary periods, neither continents nor
continental islands existed where our oceans now extend; for had they
existed, palaeozoic and secondary formations would in all probability
have been accumulated from sediment derived from their wear and tear;
and would have been at least partially upheaved by the oscillations of
level, which must have intervened during these enormously long periods.
If, then, we may infer anything from these facts, we may infer that,
where our oceans now extend, oceans have extended from the remotest
period of which we have any record; and on the other hand, that where
continents now exist, large tracts of land have existed, subjected, no
doubt, to great oscillations of level, since the Cambrian period. The
coloured map appended to my volume on Coral Reefs, led me to conclude
that the great oceans are still mainly areas of subsidence, the great
archipelagoes still areas of oscillations of level, and the continents
areas of elevation. But we have no reason to assume that things have
thus remained from the beginning of the world. Our continents seem to
have been formed by a preponderance, during many oscillations of
level, of the force of elevation. But may not the areas of preponderant
movement have changed in the lapse of ages? At a period long antecedent
to the Cambrian epoch, continents may have existed where oceans are
now spread out, and clear and open oceans may have existed where our
continents now stand. Nor should we be justified in assuming that if,
for instance, the bed of the Pacific Ocean were now converted into a
continent we should there find sedimentary formations, in recognisable
condition, older than the Cambrian strata, supposing such to have been
formerly deposited; for it might well happen that strata which had
subsided some miles nearer to the centre of the earth, and which had
been pressed on by an enormous weight of superincumbent water, might
have undergone far more metamorphic action than strata which have always
remained nearer to the surface. The immense areas in some parts of the
world, for instance in South America, of naked metamorphic rocks, which
must have been heated under great pressure, have always seemed to me to
require some special explanation; and we may perhaps believe that we see
in these large areas the many formations long anterior to the Cambrian
epoch in a completely metamorphosed and denuded condition.

The several difficulties here discussed, namely, that, though we find in
our geological formations many links between the species which now exist
and which formerly existed, we do not find infinitely numerous fine
transitional forms closely joining them all together. The sudden
manner in which several groups of species first appear in our European
formations, the almost entire absence, as at present known, of
formations rich in fossils beneath the Cambrian strata, are all
undoubtedly of the most serious nature. We see this in the fact that
the most eminent palaeontologists, namely, Cuvier, Agassiz, Barrande,
Pictet, Falconer, E. Forbes, etc., and all our greatest geologists, as
Lyell, Murchison, Sedgwick, etc., have unanimously, often vehemently,
maintained the immutability of species. But Sir Charles Lyell now
gives the support of his high authority to the opposite side, and most
geologists and palaeontologists are much shaken in their former belief.
Those who believe that the geological record is in any degree perfect,
will undoubtedly at once reject my theory. For my part, following out
Lyell's metaphor, I look at the geological record as a history of
the world imperfectly kept and written in a changing dialect. Of this
history we possess the last volume alone, relating only to two or three
countries. Of this volume, only here and there a short chapter has been
preserved, and of each page, only here and there a few lines. Each
word of the slowly-changing language, more or less different in the
successive chapters, may represent the forms of life, which are entombed
in our consecutive formations, and which falsely appear to have been
abruptly introduced. On this view the difficulties above discussed are
greatly diminished or even disappear.




CHAPTER XI. ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS.

 On the slow and successive appearance of new species--On their different
 rates of change--Species once lost do not reappear--Groups of species
 follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as
 do single species--On extinction--On simultaneous changes in the forms
 of life throughout the world--On the affinities of extinct species to
 each other and to living species--On the state of development of
 ancient forms--On the succession of the same types within the same
 areas--Summary of preceding and present chapters.


Let us now see whether the several facts and laws relating to the
geological succession of organic beings accord best with the common view
of the immutability of species, or with that of their slow and gradual
modification, through variation and natural selection.

New species have appeared very slowly, one after another, both on the
land and in the waters. Lyell has shown that it is hardly possible to
resist the evidence on this head in the case of the several tertiary
stages; and every year tends to fill up the blanks between the stages,
and to make the proportion between the lost and existing forms more
gradual. In some of the most recent beds, though undoubtedly of high
antiquity if measured by years, only one or two species are extinct,
and only one or two are new, having appeared there for the first time,
either locally, or, as far as we know, on the face of the earth. The
secondary formations are more broken; but, as Bronn has remarked,
neither the appearance nor disappearance of the many species embedded in
each formation has been simultaneous.

Species belonging to different genera and classes have not changed at
the same rate, or in the same degree. In the older tertiary beds a few
living shells may still be found in the midst of a multitude of extinct
forms. Falconer has given a striking instance of a similar fact, for an
existing crocodile is associated with many lost mammals and reptiles in
the sub-Himalayan deposits. The Silurian Lingula differs but little from
the living species of this genus; whereas most of the other Silurian
Molluscs and all the Crustaceans have changed greatly. The productions
of the land seem to have changed at a quicker rate than those of the
sea, of which a striking instance has been observed in Switzerland.
There is some reason to believe that organisms high in the scale, change
more quickly than those that are low: though there are exceptions to
this rule. The amount of organic change, as Pictet has remarked, is not
the same in each successive so-called formation. Yet if we compare any
but the most closely related formations, all the species will be found
to have undergone some change. When a species has once disappeared
from the face of the earth, we have no reason to believe that the same
identical form ever reappears. The strongest apparent exception to this
latter rule is that of the so-called "colonies" of M. Barrande, which
intrude for a period in the midst of an older formation, and then allow
the pre-existing fauna to reappear; but Lyell's explanation, namely,
that it is a case of temporary migration from a distinct geographical
province, seems satisfactory.

These several facts accord well with our theory, which includes no fixed
law of development, causing all the inhabitants of an area to change
abruptly, or simultaneously, or to an equal degree. The process of
modification must be slow, and will generally affect only a few species
at the same time; for the variability of each species is independent of
that of all others. Whether such variations or individual differences as
may arise will be accumulated through natural selection in a greater
or less degree, thus causing a greater or less amount of permanent
modification, will depend on many complex contingencies--on
the variations being of a beneficial nature, on the freedom of
intercrossing, on the slowly changing physical conditions of the
country, on the immigration of new colonists, and on the nature of the
other inhabitants with which the varying species come into competition.
Hence it is by no means surprising that one species should retain the
same identical form much longer than others; or, if changing, should
change in a less degree. We find similar relations between the existing
inhabitants of distinct countries; for instance, the land-shells and
coleopterous insects of Madeira have come to differ considerably from
their nearest allies on the continent of Europe, whereas the marine
shells and birds have remained unaltered. We can perhaps understand
the apparently quicker rate of change in terrestrial and in more highly
organised productions compared with marine and lower productions, by
the more complex relations of the higher beings to their organic and
inorganic conditions of life, as explained in a former chapter. When
many of the inhabitants of any area have become modified and improved,
we can understand, on the principle of competition, and from the
all-important relations of organism to organism in the struggle for
life, that any form which did not become in some degree modified and
improved, would be liable to extermination. Hence, we see why all
the species in the same region do at last, if we look to long enough
intervals of time, become modified; for otherwise they would become
extinct.

In members of the same class the average amount of change, during long
and equal periods of time, may, perhaps, be nearly the same; but as the
accumulation of enduring formations, rich in fossils, depends on great
masses of sediment being deposited on subsiding areas, our formations
have been almost necessarily accumulated at wide and irregularly
intermittent intervals of time; consequently the amount of organic
change exhibited by the fossils embedded in consecutive formations
is not equal. Each formation, on this view, does not mark a new and
complete act of creation, but only an occasional scene, taken almost at
hazard, in an ever slowly changing drama.

We can clearly understand why a species when once lost should never
reappear, even if the very same conditions of life, organic and
inorganic, should recur. For though the offspring of one species might
be adapted (and no doubt this has occurred in innumerable instances)
to fill the place of another species in the economy of nature, and
thus supplant it; yet the two forms--the old and the new--would not be
identically the same; for both would almost certainly inherit different
characters from their distinct progenitors; and organisms already
differing would vary in a different manner. For instance, it is
possible, if all our fantail-pigeons were destroyed, that fanciers might
make a new breed hardly distinguishable from the present breed; but if
the parent rock-pigeon were likewise destroyed, and under nature we have
every reason to believe that parent forms are generally supplanted
and exterminated by their improved offspring, it is incredible that a
fantail, identical with the existing breed, could be raised from any
other species of pigeon, or even from any other well established race
of the domestic pigeon, for the successive variations would almost
certainly be in some degree different, and the newly-formed variety
would probably inherit from its progenitor some characteristic
differences.

Groups of species, that is, genera and families, follow the same general
rules in their appearance and disappearance as do single species,
changing more or less quickly, and in a greater or lesser degree. A
group, when it has once disappeared, never reappears; that is, its
existence, as long as it lasts, is continuous. I am aware that there
are some apparent exceptions to this rule, but the exceptions are
surprisingly few, so few that E. Forbes, Pictet, and Woodward (though
all strongly opposed to such views as I maintain) admit its truth; and
the rule strictly accords with the theory. For all the species of
the same group, however long it may have lasted, are the modified
descendants one from the other, and all from a common progenitor. In
the genus Lingula, for instance, the species which have successively
appeared at all ages must have been connected by an unbroken series of
generations, from the lowest Silurian stratum to the present day.

We have seen in the last chapter that whole groups of species sometimes
falsely appear to have been abruptly developed; and I have attempted
to give an explanation of this fact, which if true would be fatal to my
views. But such cases are certainly exceptional; the general rule being
a gradual increase in number, until the group reaches its maximum, and
then, sooner or later, a gradual decrease. If the number of the species
included within a genus, or the number of the genera within a family, be
represented by a vertical line of varying thickness, ascending through
the successive geological formations, in which the species are found,
the line will sometimes falsely appear to begin at its lower end, not in
a sharp point, but abruptly; it then gradually thickens upwards, often
keeping of equal thickness for a space, and ultimately thins out in the
upper beds, marking the decrease and final extinction of the species.
This gradual increase in number of the species of a group is strictly
conformable with the theory; for the species of the same genus, and the
genera of the same family, can increase only slowly and progressively;
the process of modification and the production of a number of allied
forms necessarily being a slow and gradual process, one species first
giving rise to two or three varieties, these being slowly converted
into species, which in their turn produce by equally slow steps other
varieties and species, and so on, like the branching of a great tree
from a single stem, till the group becomes large.

ON EXTINCTION.

We have as yet only spoken incidentally of the disappearance of species
and of groups of species. On the theory of natural selection, the
extinction of old forms and the production of new and improved forms are
intimately connected together. The old notion of all the inhabitants of
the earth having been swept away by catastrophes at successive periods
is very generally given up, even by those geologists, as Elie de
Beaumont, Murchison, Barrande, etc., whose general views would naturally
lead them to this conclusion. On the contrary, we have every reason to
believe, from the study of the tertiary formations, that species and
groups of species gradually disappear, one after another, first from one
spot, then from another, and finally from the world. In some few cases,
however, as by the breaking of an isthmus and the consequent irruption
of a multitude of new inhabitants into an adjoining sea, or by the final
subsidence of an island, the process of extinction may have been rapid.
Both single species and whole groups of species last for very unequal
periods; some groups, as we have seen, have endured from the earliest
known dawn of life to the present day; some have disappeared before
the close of the palaeozoic period. No fixed law seems to determine
the length of time during which any single species or any single genus
endures. There is reason to believe that the extinction of a whole group
of species is generally a slower process than their production: if their
appearance and disappearance be represented, as before, by a vertical
line of varying thickness the line is found to taper more gradually at
its upper end, which marks the progress of extermination, than at its
lower end, which marks the first appearance and the early increase in
number of the species. In some cases, however, the extermination of
whole groups, as of ammonites, towards the close of the secondary
period, has been wonderfully sudden.

The extinction of species has been involved in the most gratuitous
mystery. Some authors have even supposed that, as the individual has a
definite length of life, so have species a definite duration. No one can
have marvelled more than I have done at the extinction of species. When
I found in La Plata the tooth of a horse embedded with the remains of
Mastodon, Megatherium, Toxodon and other extinct monsters, which all
co-existed with still living shells at a very late geological period,
I was filled with astonishment; for, seeing that the horse, since its
introduction by the Spaniards into South America, has run wild over the
whole country and has increased in numbers at an unparalleled rate, I
asked myself what could so recently have exterminated the former horse
under conditions of life apparently so favourable. But my astonishment
was groundless. Professor Owen soon perceived that the tooth, though
so like that of the existing horse, belonged to an extinct species. Had
this horse been still living, but in some degree rare, no naturalist
would have felt the least surprise at its rarity; for rarity is the
attribute of a vast number of species of all classes, in all countries.
If we ask ourselves why this or that species is rare, we answer that
something is unfavourable in its conditions of life; but what that
something is, we can hardly ever tell. On the supposition of the fossil
horse still existing as a rare species, we might have felt certain, from
the analogy of all other mammals, even of the slow-breeding elephant,
and from the history of the naturalisation of the domestic horse in
South America, that under more favourable conditions it would in a very
few years have stocked the whole continent. But we could not have
told what the unfavourable conditions were which checked its increase,
whether some one or several contingencies, and at what period of the
horse's life, and in what degree they severally acted. If the conditions
had gone on, however slowly, becoming less and less favourable, we
assuredly should not have perceived the fact, yet the fossil horse would
certainly have become rarer and rarer, and finally extinct--its place
being seized on by some more successful competitor.

It is most difficult always to remember that the increase of every
living creature is constantly being checked by unperceived hostile
agencies; and that these same unperceived agencies are amply sufficient
to cause rarity, and finally extinction. So little is this subject
understood, that I have heard surprise repeatedly expressed at such
great monsters as the Mastodon and the more ancient Dinosaurians having
become extinct; as if mere bodily strength gave victory in the battle of
life. Mere size, on the contrary, would in some cases determine, as has
been remarked by Owen, quicker extermination, from the greater amount
of requisite food. Before man inhabited India or Africa, some cause must
have checked the continued increase of the existing elephant. A highly
capable judge, Dr. Falconer, believes that it is chiefly insects which,
from incessantly harassing and weakening the elephant in India, check
its increase; and this was Bruce's conclusion with respect to
the African elephant in Abyssinia. It is certain that insects and
blood-sucking bats determine the existence of the larger naturalised
quadrupeds in several parts of South America.

We see in many cases in the more recent tertiary formations that rarity
precedes extinction; and we know that this has been the progress of
events with those animals which have been exterminated, either locally
or wholly, through man's agency. I may repeat what I published in 1845,
namely, that to admit that species generally become rare before they
become extinct--to feel no surprise at the rarity of a species, and yet
to marvel greatly when the species ceases to exist, is much the same as
to admit that sickness in the individual is the forerunner of death--to
feel no surprise at sickness, but, when the sick man dies, to wonder and
to suspect that he died by some deed of violence.

The theory of natural selection is grounded on the belief that each new
variety and ultimately each new species, is produced and maintained by
having some advantage over those with which it comes into competition;
and the consequent extinction of less-favoured forms almost inevitably
follows. It is the same with our domestic productions: when a new and
slightly improved variety has been raised, it at first supplants the
less improved varieties in the same neighbourhood; when much improved it
is transported far and near, like our short-horn cattle, and takes the
place of other breeds in other countries. Thus the appearance of new
forms and the disappearance of old forms, both those naturally and
artificially produced, are bound together. In flourishing groups, the
number of new specific forms which have been produced within a given
time has at some periods probably been greater than the number of
the old specific forms which have been exterminated; but we know that
species have not gone on indefinitely increasing, at least during the
later geological epochs, so that, looking to later times, we may believe
that the production of new forms has caused the extinction of about the
same number of old forms.

The competition will generally be most severe, as formerly explained
and illustrated by examples, between the forms which are most like each
other in all respects. Hence the improved and modified descendants of
a species will generally cause the extermination of the parent-species;
and if many new forms have been developed from any one species, the
nearest allies of that species, i.e. the species of the same genus, will
be the most liable to extermination. Thus, as I believe, a number of
new species descended from one species, that is a new genus, comes to
supplant an old genus, belonging to the same family. But it must often
have happened that a new species belonging to some one group has seized
on the place occupied by a species belonging to a distinct group, and
thus have caused its extermination. If many allied forms be developed
from the successful intruder, many will have to yield their places;
and it will generally be the allied forms, which will suffer from some
inherited inferiority in common. But whether it be species belonging
to the same or to a distinct class, which have yielded their places to
other modified and improved species, a few of the sufferers may often
be preserved for a long time, from being fitted to some peculiar line of
life, or from inhabiting some distant and isolated station, where they
will have escaped severe competition. For instance, some species of
Trigonia, a great genus of shells in the secondary formations, survive
in the Australian seas; and a few members of the great and almost
extinct group of Ganoid fishes still inhabit our fresh waters.
Therefore, the utter extinction of a group is generally, as we have
seen, a slower process than its production.

With respect to the apparently sudden extermination of whole families or
orders, as of Trilobites at the close of the palaeozoic period, and of
Ammonites at the close of the secondary period, we must remember what
has been already said on the probable wide intervals of time between our
consecutive formations; and in these intervals there may have been
much slow extermination. Moreover, when, by sudden immigration or by
unusually rapid development, many species of a new group have taken
possession of an area, many of the older species will have been
exterminated in a correspondingly rapid manner; and the forms which thus
yield their places will commonly be allied, for they will partake of the
same inferiority in common.

Thus, as it seems to me, the manner in which single species and whole
groups of species become extinct accords well with the theory of natural
selection. We need not marvel at extinction; if we must marvel, let it
be at our presumption in imagining for a moment that we understand
the many complex contingencies on which the existence of each species
depends. If we forget for an instant that each species tends to increase
inordinately, and that some check is always in action, yet seldom
perceived by us, the whole economy of nature will be utterly obscured.
Whenever we can precisely say why this species is more abundant
in individuals than that; why this species and not another can be
naturalised in a given country; then, and not until then, we may justly
feel surprise why we cannot account for the extinction of any particular
species or group of species.

ON THE FORMS OF LIFE CHANGING ALMOST SIMULTANEOUSLY THROUGHOUT THE
WORLD.

Scarcely any palaeontological discovery is more striking than the fact
that the forms of life change almost simultaneously throughout the
world. Thus our European Chalk formation can be recognised in many
distant regions, under the most different climates, where not a fragment
of the mineral chalk itself can be found; namely, in North America, in
equatorial South America, in Tierra del Fuego, at the Cape of Good Hope,
and in the peninsula of India. For at these distant points, the organic
remains in certain beds present an unmistakable resemblance to those
of the Chalk. It is not that the same species are met with; for in some
cases not one species is identically the same, but they belong to
the same families, genera, and sections of genera, and sometimes are
similarly characterised in such trifling points as mere superficial
sculpture. Moreover, other forms, which are not found in the Chalk of
Europe, but which occur in the formations either above or below, occur
in the same order at these distant points of the world. In the several
successive palaeozoic formations of Russia, Western Europe and North
America, a similar parallelism in the forms of life has been observed
by several authors; so it is, according to Lyell, with the European and
North American tertiary deposits. Even if the few fossil species which
are common to the Old and New Worlds were kept wholly out of view, the
general parallelism in the successive forms of life, in the palaeozoic
and tertiary stages, would still be manifest, and the several formations
could be easily correlated.

These observations, however, relate to the marine inhabitants of the
world: we have not sufficient data to judge whether the productions
of the land and of fresh water at distant points change in the same
parallel manner. We may doubt whether they have thus changed: if the
Megatherium, Mylodon, Macrauchenia, and Toxodon had been brought
to Europe from La Plata, without any information in regard to their
geological position, no one would have suspected that they had
co-existed with sea-shells all still living; but as these anomalous
monsters co-existed with the Mastodon and Horse, it might at least
have been inferred that they had lived during one of the later tertiary
stages.

When the marine forms of life are spoken of as having changed
simultaneously throughout the world, it must not be supposed that this
expression relates to the same year, or even to the same century, or
even that it has a very strict geological sense; for if all the marine
animals now living in Europe, and all those that lived in Europe during
the pleistocene period (a very remote period as measured by years,
including the whole glacial epoch) were compared with those now existing
in South America or in Australia, the most skilful naturalist would
hardly be able to say whether the present or the pleistocene inhabitants
of Europe resembled most closely those of the southern hemisphere. So,
again, several highly competent observers maintain that the existing
productions of the United States are more closely related to those which
lived in Europe during certain late tertiary stages, than to the
present inhabitants of Europe; and if this be so, it is evident that
fossiliferous beds now deposited on the shores of North America would
hereafter be liable to be classed with somewhat older European beds.
Nevertheless, looking to a remotely future epoch, there can be little
doubt that all the more modern MARINE formations, namely, the upper
pliocene, the pleistocene and strictly modern beds of Europe, North and
South America, and Australia, from containing fossil remains in some
degree allied, and from not including those forms which are found
only in the older underlying deposits, would be correctly ranked as
simultaneous in a geological sense.

The fact of the forms of life changing simultaneously in the above large
sense, at distant parts of the world, has greatly struck those admirable
observers, MM. de Verneuil and d'Archiac. After referring to the
parallelism of the palaeozoic forms of life in various parts of Europe,
they add, "If struck by this strange sequence, we turn our attention to
North America, and there discover a series of analogous phenomena,
it will appear certain that all these modifications of species, their
extinction, and the introduction of new ones, cannot be owing to mere
changes in marine currents or other causes more or less local and
temporary, but depend on general laws which govern the whole animal
kingdom." M. Barrande has made forcible remarks to precisely the same
effect. It is, indeed, quite futile to look to changes of currents,
climate, or other physical conditions, as the cause of these great
mutations in the forms of life throughout the world, under the most
different climates. We must, as Barrande has remarked, look to some
special law. We shall see this more clearly when we treat of the present
distribution of organic beings, and find how slight is the relation
between the physical conditions of various countries and the nature of
their inhabitants.

This great fact of the parallel succession of the forms of life
throughout the world, is explicable on the theory of natural selection.
New species are formed by having some advantage over older forms; and
the forms, which are already dominant, or have some advantage over the
other forms in their own country, give birth to the greatest number of
new varieties or incipient species. We have distinct evidence on this
head, in the plants which are dominant, that is, which are commonest and
most widely diffused, producing the greatest number of new varieties.
It is also natural that the dominant, varying and far-spreading species,
which have already invaded, to a certain extent, the territories of
other species, should be those which would have the best chance of
spreading still further, and of giving rise in new countries to other
new varieties and species. The process of diffusion would often be
very slow, depending on climatal and geographical changes, on strange
accidents, and on the gradual acclimatization of new species to the
various climates through which they might have to pass, but in the
course of time the dominant forms would generally succeed in spreading
and would ultimately prevail. The diffusion would, it is probable, be
slower with the terrestrial inhabitants of distinct continents than with
the marine inhabitants of the continuous sea. We might therefore expect
to find, as we do find, a less strict degree of parallelism in the
succession of the productions of the land than with those of the sea.

Thus, as it seems to me, the parallel, and, taken in a large sense,
simultaneous, succession of the same forms of life throughout the world,
accords well with the principle of new species having been formed by
dominant species spreading widely and varying; the new species thus
produced being themselves dominant, owing to their having had some
advantage over their already dominant parents, as well as over other
species; and again spreading, varying, and producing new forms. The
old forms which are beaten and which yield their places to the new and
victorious forms, will generally be allied in groups, from inheriting
some inferiority in common; and, therefore, as new and improved groups
spread throughout the world, old groups disappear from the world; and
the succession of forms everywhere tends to correspond both in their
first appearance and final disappearance.

There is one other remark connected with this subject worth making. I
have given my reasons for believing that most of our great formations,
rich in fossils, were deposited during periods of subsidence; and that
blank intervals of vast duration, as far as fossils are concerned,
occurred during the periods when the bed of the sea was either
stationary or rising, and likewise when sediment was not thrown down
quickly enough to embed and preserve organic remains. During these
long and blank intervals I suppose that the inhabitants of each region
underwent a considerable amount of modification and extinction, and
that there was much migration from other parts of the world. As we have
reason to believe that large areas are affected by the same movement,
it is probable that strictly contemporaneous formations have often been
accumulated over very wide spaces in the same quarter of the world;
but we are very far from having any right to conclude that this has
invariably been the case, and that large areas have invariably been
affected by the same movements. When two formations have been deposited
in two regions during nearly, but not exactly, the same period,
we should find in both, from the causes explained in the foregoing
paragraphs, the same general succession in the forms of life; but the
species would not exactly correspond; for there will have been a
little more time in the one region than in the other for modification,
extinction, and immigration.

I suspect that cases of this nature occur in Europe. Mr. Prestwich, in
his admirable Memoirs on the eocene deposits of England and France, is
able to draw a close general parallelism between the successive stages
in the two countries; but when he compares certain stages in England
with those in France, although he finds in both a curious accordance in
the numbers of the species belonging to the same genera, yet the species
themselves differ in a manner very difficult to account for considering
the proximity of the two areas, unless, indeed, it be assumed that an
isthmus separated two seas inhabited by distinct, but contemporaneous
faunas. Lyell has made similar observations on some of the later
tertiary formations. Barrande, also, shows that there is a striking
general parallelism in the successive Silurian deposits of Bohemia and
Scandinavia; nevertheless he finds a surprising amount of difference in
the species. If the several formations in these regions have not been
deposited during the same exact periods--a formation in one region often
corresponding with a blank interval in the other--and if in both regions
the species have gone on slowly changing during the accumulation of the
several formations and during the long intervals of time between them;
in this case the several formations in the two regions could be arranged
in the same order, in accordance with the general succession of the
forms of life, and the order would falsely appear to be strictly
parallel; nevertheless the species would not all be the same in the
apparently corresponding stages in the two regions.

ON THE AFFINITIES OF EXTINCT SPECIES TO EACH OTHER, AND TO LIVING FORMS.

Let us now look to the mutual affinities of extinct and living species.
All fall into a few grand classes; and this fact is at once explained on
the principle of descent. The more ancient any form is, the more, as a
general rule, it differs from living forms. But, as Buckland long ago
remarked, extinct species can all be classed either in still existing
groups, or between them. That the extinct forms of life help to fill
up the intervals between existing genera, families, and orders, is
certainly true; but as this statement has often been ignored or even
denied, it may be well to make some remarks on this subject, and to give
some instances. If we confine our attention either to the living or to
the extinct species of the same class, the series is far less perfect
than if we combine both into one general system. In the writings of
Professor Owen we continually meet with the expression of generalised
forms, as applied to extinct animals; and in the writings of Agassiz, of
prophetic or synthetic types; and these terms imply that such forms
are, in fact, intermediate or connecting links. Another distinguished
palaeontologist, M. Gaudry, has shown in the most striking manner that
many of the fossil mammals discovered by him in Attica serve to break
down the intervals between existing genera. Cuvier ranked the Ruminants
and Pachyderms as two of the most distinct orders of mammals; but so
many fossil links have been disentombed that Owen has had to alter the
whole classification, and has placed certain Pachyderms in the same
sub-order with ruminants; for example, he dissolves by gradations the
apparently wide interval between the pig and the camel. The Ungulata
or hoofed quadrupeds are now divided into the even-toed or odd-toed
divisions; but the Macrauchenia of South America connects to a certain
extent these two grand divisions. No one will deny that the Hipparion
is intermediate between the existing horse and certain other ungulate
forms. What a wonderful connecting link in the chain of mammals is the
Typotherium from South America, as the name given to it by Professor
Gervais expresses, and which cannot be placed in any existing order. The
Sirenia form a very distinct group of the mammals, and one of the most
remarkable peculiarities in existing dugong and lamentin is the entire
absence of hind limbs, without even a rudiment being left; but the
extinct Halitherium had, according to Professor Flower, an ossified
thigh-bone "articulated to a well-defined acetabulum in the pelvis," and
it thus makes some approach to ordinary hoofed quadrupeds, to which the
Sirenia are in other respects allied. The cetaceans or whales are
widely different from all other mammals, but the tertiary Zeuglodon and
Squalodon, which have been placed by some naturalists in an order
by themselves, are considered by Professor Huxley to be undoubtedly
cetaceans, "and to constitute connecting links with the aquatic
carnivora."

Even the wide interval between birds and reptiles has been shown by
the naturalist just quoted to be partially bridged over in the
most unexpected manner, on the one hand, by the ostrich and extinct
Archeopteryx, and on the other hand by the Compsognathus, one of
the Dinosaurians--that group which includes the most gigantic of all
terrestrial reptiles. Turning to the Invertebrata, Barrande asserts, a
higher authority could not be named, that he is every day taught that,
although palaeozoic animals can certainly be classed under existing
groups, yet that at this ancient period the groups were not so
distinctly separated from each other as they now are.

Some writers have objected to any extinct species, or group of species,
being considered as intermediate between any two living species, or
groups of species. If by this term it is meant that an extinct form is
directly intermediate in all its characters between two living forms or
groups, the objection is probably valid. But in a natural classification
many fossil species certainly stand between living species, and some
extinct genera between living genera, even between genera belonging to
distinct families. The most common case, especially with respect to very
distinct groups, such as fish and reptiles, seems to be that, supposing
them to be distinguished at the present day by a score of characters,
the ancient members are separated by a somewhat lesser number of
characters, so that the two groups formerly made a somewhat nearer
approach to each other than they now do.

It is a common belief that the more ancient a form is, by so much the
more it tends to connect by some of its characters groups now widely
separated from each other. This remark no doubt must be restricted
to those groups which have undergone much change in the course of
geological ages; and it would be difficult to prove the truth of
the proposition, for every now and then even a living animal, as the
Lepidosiren, is discovered having affinities directed towards very
distinct groups. Yet if we compare the older Reptiles and Batrachians,
the older Fish, the older Cephalopods, and the eocene Mammals, with the
recent members of the same classes, we must admit that there is truth in
the remark.

Let us see how far these several facts and inferences accord with the
theory of descent with modification. As the subject is somewhat complex,
I must request the reader to turn to the diagram in the fourth chapter.
We may suppose that the numbered letters in italics represent genera,
and the dotted lines diverging from them the species in each genus. The
diagram is much too simple, too few genera and too few species being
given, but this is unimportant for us. The horizontal lines may
represent successive geological formations, and all the forms beneath
the uppermost line may be considered as extinct. The three existing
genera, a14, q14, p14, will form a small family; b14 and f14, a closely
allied family or subfamily; and o14, i14, m14, a third family. These
three families, together with the many extinct genera on the several
lines of descent diverging from the parent form (A) will form an order;
for all will have inherited something in common from their ancient
progenitor. On the principle of the continued tendency to divergence
of character, which was formerly illustrated by this diagram, the more
recent any form is the more it will generally differ from its ancient
progenitor. Hence, we can understand the rule that the most ancient
fossils differ most from existing forms. We must not, however, assume
that divergence of character is a necessary contingency; it depends
solely on the descendants from a species being thus enabled to seize
on many and different places in the economy of nature. Therefore it is
quite possible, as we have seen in the case of some Silurian forms,
that a species might go on being slightly modified in relation to its
slightly altered conditions of life, and yet retain throughout a vast
period the same general characteristics. This is represented in the
diagram by the letter F14.

All the many forms, extinct and recent, descended from (A), make, as
before remarked, one order; and this order, from the continued effects
of extinction and divergence of character, has become divided into
several sub-families and families, some of which are supposed to have
perished at different periods, and some to have endured to the present
day.

By looking at the diagram we can see that if many of the extinct forms
supposed to be embedded in the successive formations, were discovered
at several points low down in the series, the three existing families on
the uppermost line would be rendered less distinct from each other. If,
for instance, the genera a1, a5, a10, f8, m3, m6, m9, were disinterred,
these three families would be so closely linked together that they
probably would have to be united into one great family, in nearly the
same manner as has occurred with ruminants and certain pachyderms. Yet
he who objected to consider as intermediate the extinct genera, which
thus link together the living genera of three families, would be partly
justified, for they are intermediate, not directly, but only by a long
and circuitous course through many widely different forms. If many
extinct forms were to be discovered above one of the middle horizontal
lines or geological formations--for instance, above No. VI.--but none
from beneath this line, then only two of the families (those on the left
hand a14, etc., and b14, etc.) would have to be united into one; and
there would remain two families which would be less distinct from each
other than they were before the discovery of the fossils. So again, if
the three families formed of eight genera (a14 to m14), on the uppermost
line, be supposed to differ from each other by half-a-dozen important
characters, then the families which existed at a period marked VI would
certainly have differed from each other by a less number of characters;
for they would at this early stage of descent have diverged in a less
degree from their common progenitor. Thus it comes that ancient and
extinct genera are often in a greater or less degree intermediate
in character between their modified descendants, or between their
collateral relations.

Under nature the process will be far more complicated than is
represented in the diagram; for the groups will have been more numerous;
they will have endured for extremely unequal lengths of time, and will
have been modified in various degrees. As we possess only the last
volume of the geological record, and that in a very broken condition,
we have no right to expect, except in rare cases, to fill up the wide
intervals in the natural system, and thus to unite distinct families or
orders. All that we have a right to expect is, that those groups which
have, within known geological periods, undergone much modification,
should in the older formations make some slight approach to each other;
so that the older members should differ less from each other in some of
their characters than do the existing members of the same groups;
and this by the concurrent evidence of our best palaeontologists is
frequently the case.

Thus, on the theory of descent with modification, the main facts with
respect to the mutual affinities of the extinct forms of life to each
other and to living forms, are explained in a satisfactory manner. And
they are wholly inexplicable on any other view.

On this same theory, it is evident that the fauna during any one great
period in the earth's history will be intermediate in general character
between that which preceded and that which succeeded it. Thus the
species which lived at the sixth great stage of descent in the diagram
are the modified offspring of those which lived at the fifth stage, and
are the parents of those which became still more modified at the
seventh stage; hence they could hardly fail to be nearly intermediate in
character between the forms of life above and below. We must, however,
allow for the entire extinction of some preceding forms, and in any one
region for the immigration of new forms from other regions, and for a
large amount of modification during the long and blank intervals between
the successive formations. Subject to these allowances, the fauna of
each geological period undoubtedly is intermediate in character, between
the preceding and succeeding faunas. I need give only one instance,
namely, the manner in which the fossils of the Devonian system,
when this system was first discovered, were at once recognised by
palaeontologists as intermediate in character between those of the
overlying carboniferous and underlying Silurian systems. But each fauna
is not necessarily exactly intermediate, as unequal intervals of time
have elapsed between consecutive formations.

It is no real objection to the truth of the statement that the fauna of
each period as a whole is nearly intermediate in character between the
preceding and succeeding faunas, that certain genera offer exceptions
to the rule. For instance, the species of mastodons and elephants, when
arranged by Dr. Falconer in two series--in the first place according
to their mutual affinities, and in the second place according to their
periods of existence--do not accord in arrangement. The species extreme
in character are not the oldest or the most recent; nor are those which
are intermediate in character, intermediate in age. But supposing for
an instant, in this and other such cases, that the record of the first
appearance and disappearance of the species was complete, which is far
from the case, we have no reason to believe that forms successively
produced necessarily endure for corresponding lengths of time. A very
ancient form may occasionally have lasted much longer than a form
elsewhere subsequently produced, especially in the case of terrestrial
productions inhabiting separated districts. To compare small things with
great; if the principal living and extinct races of the domestic pigeon
were arranged in serial affinity, this arrangement would not closely
accord with the order in time of their production, and even less with
the order of their disappearance; for the parent rock-pigeon still
lives; and many varieties between the rock-pigeon and the carrier
have become extinct; and carriers which are extreme in the important
character of length of beak originated earlier than short-beaked
tumblers, which are at the opposite end of the series in this respect.

Closely connected with the statement, that the organic remains from an
intermediate formation are in some degree intermediate in character,
is the fact, insisted on by all palaeontologists, that fossils from two
consecutive formations are far more closely related to each other, than
are the fossils from two remote formations. Pictet gives as a well-known
instance, the general resemblance of the organic remains from the
several stages of the Chalk formation, though the species are distinct
in each stage. This fact alone, from its generality, seems to have
shaken Professor Pictet in his belief in the immutability of species.
He who is acquainted with the distribution of existing species over the
globe, will not attempt to account for the close resemblance of distinct
species in closely consecutive formations, by the physical conditions of
the ancient areas having remained nearly the same. Let it be remembered
that the forms of life, at least those inhabiting the sea, have changed
almost simultaneously throughout the world, and therefore under the most
different climates and conditions. Consider the prodigious vicissitudes
of climate during the pleistocene period, which includes the whole
glacial epoch, and note how little the specific forms of the inhabitants
of the sea have been affected.

On the theory of descent, the full meaning of the fossil remains from
closely consecutive formations, being closely related, though ranked as
distinct species, is obvious. As the accumulation of each formation
has often been interrupted, and as long blank intervals have intervened
between successive formations, we ought not to expect to find, as
I attempted to show in the last chapter, in any one or in any two
formations, all the intermediate varieties between the species which
appeared at the commencement and close of these periods: but we ought
to find after intervals, very long as measured by years, but only
moderately long as measured geologically, closely allied forms, or, as
they have been called by some authors, representative species; and these
assuredly we do find. We find, in short, such evidence of the slow and
scarcely sensible mutations of specific forms, as we have the right to
expect.

ON THE STATE OF DEVELOPMENT OF ANCIENT COMPARED WITH LIVING FORMS.

We have seen in the fourth chapter that the degree of differentiation
and specialisation of the parts in organic beings, when arrived at
maturity, is the best standard, as yet suggested, of their degree of
perfection or highness. We have also seen that, as the specialisation of
parts is an advantage to each being, so natural selection will tend to
render the organisation of each being more specialised and perfect,
and in this sense higher; not but that it may leave many creatures with
simple and unimproved structures fitted for simple conditions of life,
and in some cases will even degrade or simplify the organisation, yet
leaving such degraded beings better fitted for their new walks of life.
In another and more general manner, new species become superior to their
predecessors; for they have to beat in the struggle for life all
the older forms, with which they come into close competition. We may
therefore conclude that if under a nearly similar climate the eocene
inhabitants of the world could be put into competition with the existing
inhabitants, the former would be beaten and exterminated by the
latter, as would the secondary by the eocene, and the palaeozoic by
the secondary forms. So that by this fundamental test of victory in the
battle for life, as well as by the standard of the specialisation of
organs, modern forms ought, on the theory of natural selection, to
stand higher than ancient forms. Is this the case? A large majority of
palaeontologists would answer in the affirmative; and it seems that this
answer must be admitted as true, though difficult of proof.

It is no valid objection to this conclusion, that certain Brachiopods
have been but slightly modified from an extremely remote geological
epoch; and that certain land and fresh-water shells have remained nearly
the same, from the time when, as far as is known, they first appeared.
It is not an insuperable difficulty that Foraminifera have not, as
insisted on by Dr. Carpenter, progressed in organisation since even the
Laurentian epoch; for some organisms would have to remain fitted for
simple conditions of life, and what could be better fitted for this end
than these lowly organised Protozoa? Such objections as the above
would be fatal to my view, if it included advance in organisation as
a necessary contingent. They would likewise be fatal, if the above
Foraminifera, for instance, could be proved to have first come into
existence during the Laurentian epoch, or the above Brachiopods during
the Cambrian formation; for in this case, there would not have been time
sufficient for the development of these organisms up to the standard
which they had then reached. When advanced up to any given point, there
is no necessity, on the theory of natural selection, for their further
continued process; though they will, during each successive age, have to
be slightly modified, so as to hold their places in relation to slight
changes in their conditions. The foregoing objections hinge on the
question whether we really know how old the world is, and at what period
the various forms of life first appeared; and this may well be disputed.

The problem whether organisation on the whole has advanced is in
many ways excessively intricate. The geological record, at all times
imperfect, does not extend far enough back to show with unmistakable
clearness that within the known history of the world organisation has
largely advanced. Even at the present day, looking to members of the
same class, naturalists are not unanimous which forms ought to be ranked
as highest: thus, some look at the selaceans or sharks, from their
approach in some important points of structure to reptiles, as the
highest fish; others look at the teleosteans as the highest. The ganoids
stand intermediate between the selaceans and teleosteans; the latter
at the present day are largely preponderant in number; but formerly
selaceans and ganoids alone existed; and in this case, according to
the standard of highness chosen, so will it be said that fishes have
advanced or retrograded in organisation. To attempt to compare members
of distinct types in the scale of highness seems hopeless; who will
decide whether a cuttle-fish be higher than a bee--that insect which
the great Von Baer believed to be "in fact more highly organised than a
fish, although upon another type?" In the complex struggle for life it
is quite credible that crustaceans, not very high in their own class,
might beat cephalopods, the highest molluscs; and such crustaceans,
though not highly developed, would stand very high in the scale of
invertebrate animals, if judged by the most decisive of all trials--the
law of battle. Beside these inherent difficulties in deciding which
forms are the most advanced in organisation, we ought not solely to
compare the highest members of a class at any two periods--though
undoubtedly this is one and perhaps the most important element in
striking a balance--but we ought to compare all the members, high
and low, at two periods. At an ancient epoch the highest and lowest
molluscoidal animals, namely, cephalopods and brachiopods, swarmed in
numbers; at the present time both groups are greatly reduced,
while others, intermediate in organisation, have largely increased;
consequently some naturalists maintain that molluscs were formerly more
highly developed than at present; but a stronger case can be made out on
the opposite side, by considering the vast reduction of brachiopods, and
the fact that our existing cephalopods, though few in number, are more
highly organised than their ancient representatives. We ought also to
compare the relative proportional numbers, at any two periods, of the
high and low classes throughout the world: if, for instance, at the
present day fifty thousand kinds of vertebrate animals exist, and if
we knew that at some former period only ten thousand kinds existed, we
ought to look at this increase in number in the highest class, which
implies a great displacement of lower forms, as a decided advance in the
organisation of the world. We thus see how hopelessly difficult it is to
compare with perfect fairness, under such extremely complex relations,
the standard of organisation of the imperfectly-known faunas of
successive periods.

We shall appreciate this difficulty more clearly by looking to certain
existing faunas and floras. From the extraordinary manner in which
European productions have recently spread over New Zealand, and have
seized on places which must have been previously occupied by the
indigenes, we must believe, that if all the animals and plants of Great
Britain were set free in New Zealand, a multitude of British forms would
in the course of time become thoroughly naturalized there, and would
exterminate many of the natives. On the other hand, from the fact that
hardly a single inhabitant of the southern hemisphere has become wild in
any part of Europe, we may well doubt whether, if all the productions
of New Zealand were set free in Great Britain, any considerable number
would be enabled to seize on places now occupied by our native plants
and animals. Under this point of view, the productions of Great Britain
stand much higher in the scale than those of New Zealand. Yet the
most skilful naturalist, from an examination of the species of the two
countries, could not have foreseen this result.

Agassiz and several other highly competent judges insist that ancient
animals resemble to a certain extent the embryos of recent animals
belonging to the same classes; and that the geological succession of
extinct forms is nearly parallel with the embryological development of
existing forms. This view accords admirably well with our theory. In a
future chapter I shall attempt to show that the adult differs from its
embryo, owing to variations having supervened at a not early age, and
having been inherited at a corresponding age. This process, whilst it
leaves the embryo almost unaltered, continually adds, in the course of
successive generations, more and more difference to the adult. Thus the
embryo comes to be left as a sort of picture, preserved by nature, of
the former and less modified condition of the species. This view may be
true, and yet may never be capable of proof. Seeing, for instance, that
the oldest known mammals, reptiles, and fishes strictly belong to their
proper classes, though some of these old forms are in a slight degree
less distinct from each other than are the typical members of the same
groups at the present day, it would be vain to look for animals having
the common embryological character of the Vertebrata, until beds rich
in fossils are discovered far beneath the lowest Cambrian strata--a
discovery of which the chance is small.

ON THE SUCCESSION OF THE SAME TYPES WITHIN THE SAME AREAS, DURING THE
LATER TERTIARY PERIODS.

Mr. Clift many years ago showed that the fossil mammals from the
Australian caves were closely allied to the living marsupials of that
continent. In South America, a similar relationship is manifest, even to
an uneducated eye, in the gigantic pieces of armour, like those of the
armadillo, found in several parts of La Plata; and Professor Owen has
shown in the most striking manner that most of the fossil mammals,
buried there in such numbers, are related to South American types. This
relationship is even more clearly seen in the wonderful collection of
fossil bones made by MM. Lund and Clausen in the caves of Brazil. I was
so much impressed with these facts that I strongly insisted, in 1839
and 1845, on this "law of the succession of types,"--on "this wonderful
relationship in the same continent between the dead and the living."
Professor Owen has subsequently extended the same generalisation to
the mammals of the Old World. We see the same law in this author's
restorations of the extinct and gigantic birds of New Zealand. We see
it also in the birds of the caves of Brazil. Mr. Woodward has shown that
the same law holds good with sea-shells, but, from the wide distribution
of most molluscs, it is not well displayed by them. Other cases could
be added, as the relation between the extinct and living land-shells of
Madeira; and between the extinct and living brackish water-shells of the
Aralo-Caspian Sea.

Now, what does this remarkable law of the succession of the same types
within the same areas mean? He would be a bold man who, after comparing
the present climate of Australia and of parts of South America, under
the same latitude, would attempt to account, on the one hand through
dissimilar physical conditions, for the dissimilarity of the inhabitants
of these two continents; and, on the other hand through similarity
of conditions, for the uniformity of the same types in each continent
during the later tertiary periods. Nor can it be pretended that it is
an immutable law that marsupials should have been chiefly or solely
produced in Australia; or that Edentata and other American types should
have been solely produced in South America. For we know that Europe in
ancient times was peopled by numerous marsupials; and I have shown
in the publications above alluded to, that in America the law of
distribution of terrestrial mammals was formerly different from what it
now is. North America formerly partook strongly of the present character
of the southern half of the continent; and the southern half was
formerly more closely allied, than it is at present, to the northern
half. In a similar manner we know, from Falconer and Cautley's
discoveries, that Northern India was formerly more closely related in
its mammals to Africa than it is at the present time. Analogous facts
could be given in relation to the distribution of marine animals.

On the theory of descent with modification, the great law of the long
enduring, but not immutable, succession of the same types within the
same areas, is at once explained; for the inhabitants of each quarter of
the world will obviously tend to leave in that quarter, during the next
succeeding period of time, closely allied though in some degree modified
descendants. If the inhabitants of one continent formerly differed
greatly from those of another continent, so will their modified
descendants still differ in nearly the same manner and degree. But
after very long intervals of time, and after great geographical changes,
permitting much intermigration, the feebler will yield to the more
dominant forms, and there will be nothing immutable in the distribution
of organic beings.

It may be asked in ridicule whether I suppose that the megatherium and
other allied huge monsters, which formerly lived in South America, have
left behind them the sloth, armadillo, and anteater, as their degenerate
descendants. This cannot for an instant be admitted. These huge animals
have become wholly extinct, and have left no progeny. But in the caves
of Brazil there are many extinct species which are closely allied in
size and in all other characters to the species still living in South
America; and some of these fossils may have been the actual progenitors
of the living species. It must not be forgotten that, on our theory, all
the species of the same genus are the descendants of some one species;
so that, if six genera, each having eight species, be found in one
geological formation, and in a succeeding formation there be six other
allied or representative genera, each with the same number of species,
then we may conclude that generally only one species of each of the
older genera has left modified descendants, which constitute the new
genera containing the several species; the other seven species of each
old genus having died out and left no progeny. Or, and this will be a
far commoner case, two or three species in two or three alone of the six
older genera will be the parents of the new genera: the other species
and the other old genera having become utterly extinct. In failing
orders, with the genera and species decreasing in numbers as is the case
with the Edentata of South America, still fewer genera and species will
leave modified blood-descendants.

SUMMARY OF THE PRECEDING AND PRESENT CHAPTERS.

I have attempted to show that the geological record is extremely
imperfect; that only a small portion of the globe has been geologically
explored with care; that only certain classes of organic beings have
been largely preserved in a fossil state; that the number both of
specimens and of species, preserved in our museums, is absolutely as
nothing compared with the number of generations which must have passed
away even during a single formation; that, owing to subsidence being
almost necessary for the accumulation of deposits rich in fossil species
of many kinds, and thick enough to outlast future degradation, great
intervals of time must have elapsed between most of our successive
formations; that there has probably been more extinction during
the periods of subsidence, and more variation during the periods
of elevation, and during the latter the record will have been least
perfectly kept; that each single formation has not been continuously
deposited; that the duration of each formation is probably short
compared with the average duration of specific forms; that migration has
played an important part in the first appearance of new forms in any
one area and formation; that widely ranging species are those which have
varied most frequently, and have oftenest given rise to new species;
that varieties have at first been local; and lastly, although each
species must have passed through numerous transitional stages, it is
probable that the periods, during which each underwent modification,
though many and long as measured by years, have been short in comparison
with the periods during which each remained in an unchanged condition.
These causes, taken conjointly, will to a large extent explain
why--though we do find many links--we do not find interminable
varieties, connecting together all extinct and existing forms by the
finest graduated steps. It should also be constantly borne in mind that
any linking variety between two forms, which might be found, would be
ranked, unless the whole chain could be perfectly restored, as a new
and distinct species; for it is not pretended that we have any sure
criterion by which species and varieties can be discriminated.

He who rejects this view of the imperfection of the geological record,
will rightly reject the whole theory. For he may ask in vain where are
the numberless transitional links which must formerly have connected the
closely allied or representative species, found in the successive stages
of the same great formation? He may disbelieve in the immense intervals
of time which must have elapsed between our consecutive formations;
he may overlook how important a part migration has played, when the
formations of any one great region, as those of Europe, are considered;
he may urge the apparent, but often falsely apparent, sudden coming in
of whole groups of species. He may ask where are the remains of those
infinitely numerous organisms which must have existed long before the
Cambrian system was deposited? We now know that at least one animal did
then exist; but I can answer this last question only by supposing that
where our oceans now extend they have extended for an enormous period,
and where our oscillating continents now stand they have stood since the
commencement of the Cambrian system; but that, long before that epoch,
the world presented a widely different aspect; and that the older
continents, formed of formations older than any known to us, exist now
only as remnants in a metamorphosed condition, or lie still buried under
the ocean.

Passing from these difficulties, the other great leading facts
in palaeontology agree admirably with the theory of descent with
modification through variation and natural selection. We can thus
understand how it is that new species come in slowly and successively;
how species of different classes do not necessarily change together, or
at the same rate, or in the same degree; yet in the long run that all
undergo modification to some extent. The extinction of old forms is the
almost inevitable consequence of the production of new forms. We can
understand why, when a species has once disappeared, it never reappears.
Groups of species increase in numbers slowly, and endure for unequal
periods of time; for the process of modification is necessarily
slow, and depends on many complex contingencies. The dominant species
belonging to large and dominant groups tend to leave many modified
descendants, which form new sub-groups and groups. As these are
formed, the species of the less vigorous groups, from their inferiority
inherited from a common progenitor, tend to become extinct together, and
to leave no modified offspring on the face of the earth. But the
utter extinction of a whole group of species has sometimes been a slow
process, from the survival of a few descendants, lingering in protected
and isolated situations. When a group has once wholly disappeared, it
does not reappear; for the link of generation has been broken.

We can understand how it is that dominant forms which spread widely and
yield the greatest number of varieties tend to people the world with
allied, but modified, descendants; and these will generally succeed
in displacing the groups which are their inferiors in the struggle for
existence. Hence, after long intervals of time, the productions of the
world appear to have changed simultaneously.

We can understand how it is that all the forms of life, ancient and
recent, make together a few grand classes. We can understand, from the
continued tendency to divergence of character, why the more ancient
a form is, the more it generally differs from those now living. Why
ancient and extinct forms often tend to fill up gaps between existing
forms, sometimes blending two groups, previously classed as distinct
into one; but more commonly bringing them only a little closer together.
The more ancient a form is, the more often it stands in some degree
intermediate between groups now distinct; for the more ancient a form
is, the more nearly it will be related to, and consequently resemble,
the common progenitor of groups, since become widely divergent. Extinct
forms are seldom directly intermediate between existing forms; but are
intermediate only by a long and circuitous course through other extinct
and different forms. We can clearly see why the organic remains of
closely consecutive formations are closely allied; for they are closely
linked together by generation. We can clearly see why the remains of an
intermediate formation are intermediate in character.

The inhabitants of the world at each successive period in its history
have beaten their predecessors in the race for life, and are, in so
far, higher in the scale, and their structure has generally become more
specialised; and this may account for the common belief held by so many
palaeontologists, that organisation on the whole has progressed. Extinct
and ancient animals resemble to a certain extent the embryos of the more
recent animals belonging to the same classes, and this wonderful fact
receives a simple explanation according to our views. The succession
of the same types of structure within the same areas during the later
geological periods ceases to be mysterious, and is intelligible on the
principle of inheritance.

If, then, the geological record be as imperfect as many believe, and
it may at least be asserted that the record cannot be proved to be much
more perfect, the main objections to the theory of natural selection are
greatly diminished or disappear. On the other hand, all the chief laws
of palaeontology plainly proclaim, as it seems to me, that species have
been produced by ordinary generation: old forms having been supplanted
by new and improved forms of life, the products of variation and the
survival of the fittest.




CHAPTER XII. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.

 Present distribution cannot be accounted for by differences in physical
 conditions--Importance of barriers--Affinity of the productions of the
 same continent--Centres of creation--Means of dispersal by changes of
 climate and of the level of the land, and by occasional means--Dispersal
 during the Glacial period--Alternate Glacial periods in the North and
 South.


In considering the distribution of organic beings over the face of
the globe, the first great fact which strikes us is, that neither the
similarity nor the dissimilarity of the inhabitants of various regions
can be wholly accounted for by climatal and other physical conditions.
Of late, almost every author who has studied the subject has come to
this conclusion. The case of America alone would almost suffice to prove
its truth; for if we exclude the arctic and northern temperate parts,
all authors agree that one of the most fundamental divisions in
geographical distribution is that between the New and Old Worlds; yet
if we travel over the vast American continent, from the central parts of
the United States to its extreme southern point, we meet with the most
diversified conditions; humid districts, arid deserts, lofty mountains,
grassy plains, forests, marshes, lakes and great rivers, under almost
every temperature. There is hardly a climate or condition in the Old
World which cannot be paralleled in the New--at least so closely as the
same species generally require. No doubt small areas can be pointed out
in the Old World hotter than any in the New World; but these are not
inhabited by a fauna different from that of the surrounding districts;
for it is rare to find a group of organisms confined to a small area,
of which the conditions are peculiar in only a slight degree.
Notwithstanding this general parallelism in the conditions of Old and
New Worlds, how widely different are their living productions!

In the southern hemisphere, if we compare large tracts of land in
Australia, South Africa, and western South America, between latitudes
25 and 35 degrees, we shall find parts extremely similar in all their
conditions, yet it would not be possible to point out three faunas
and floras more utterly dissimilar. Or, again, we may compare the
productions of South America south of latitude 35 degrees with those
north of 25 degrees, which consequently are separated by a space of
ten degrees of latitude, and are exposed to considerably different
conditions; yet they are incomparably more closely related to each other
than they are to the productions of Australia or Africa under nearly
the same climate. Analogous facts could be given with respect to the
inhabitants of the sea.

A second great fact which strikes us in our general review is, that
barriers of any kind, or obstacles to free migration, are related in a
close and important manner to the differences between the productions of
various regions. We see this in the great difference in nearly all the
terrestrial productions of the New and Old Worlds, excepting in the
northern parts, where the land almost joins, and where, under a slightly
different climate, there might have been free migration for the northern
temperate forms, as there now is for the strictly arctic productions.
We see the same fact in the great difference between the inhabitants of
Australia, Africa, and South America under the same latitude; for these
countries are almost as much isolated from each other as is possible. On
each continent, also, we see the same fact; for on the opposite sides of
lofty and continuous mountain-ranges, and of great deserts and even of
large rivers, we find different productions; though as mountain chains,
deserts, etc., are not as impassable, or likely to have endured so long,
as the oceans separating continents, the differences are very inferior
in degree to those characteristic of distinct continents.

Turning to the sea, we find the same law. The marine inhabitants of
the eastern and western shores of South America are very distinct, with
extremely few shells, crustacea, or echinodermata in common; but Dr.
Gunther has recently shown that about thirty per cent of the fishes are
the same on the opposite sides of the isthmus of Panama; and this fact
has led naturalists to believe that the isthmus was formerly open.
Westward of the shores of America, a wide space of open ocean extends,
with not an island as a halting-place for emigrants; here we have a
barrier of another kind, and as soon as this is passed we meet in the
eastern islands of the Pacific with another and totally distinct fauna.
So that three marine faunas range northward and southward in parallel
lines not far from each other, under corresponding climate; but from
being separated from each other by impassable barriers, either of
land or open sea, they are almost wholly distinct. On the other hand,
proceeding still further westward from the eastern islands of the
tropical parts of the Pacific, we encounter no impassable barriers, and
we have innumerable islands as halting-places, or continuous coasts,
until, after travelling over a hemisphere, we come to the shores of
Africa; and over this vast space we meet with no well-defined and
distinct marine faunas. Although so few marine animals are common to the
above-named three approximate faunas of Eastern and Western America and
the eastern Pacific islands, yet many fishes range from the Pacific into
the Indian Ocean, and many shells are common to the eastern islands of
the Pacific and the eastern shores of Africa on almost exactly opposite
meridians of longitude.

A third great fact, partly included in the foregoing statement, is the
affinity of the productions of the same continent or of the same sea,
though the species themselves are distinct at different points and
stations. It is a law of the widest generality, and every continent
offers innumerable instances. Nevertheless, the naturalist, in
travelling, for instance, from north to south, never fails to be
struck by the manner in which successive groups of beings, specifically
distinct, though nearly related, replace each other. He hears from
closely allied, yet distinct kinds of birds, notes nearly similar, and
sees their nests similarly constructed, but not quite alike, with eggs
coloured in nearly the same manner. The plains near the Straits of
Magellan are inhabited by one species of Rhea (American ostrich), and
northward the plains of La Plata by another species of the same genus;
and not by a true ostrich or emu, like those inhabiting Africa and
Australia under the same latitude. On these same plains of La Plata we
see the agouti and bizcacha, animals having nearly the same habits as
our hares and rabbits, and belonging to the same order of Rodents, but
they plainly display an American type of structure. We ascend the lofty
peaks of the Cordillera, and we find an alpine species of bizcacha; we
look to the waters, and we do not find the beaver or muskrat, but the
coypu and capybara, rodents of the South American type. Innumerable
other instances could be given. If we look to the islands off the
American shore, however much they may differ in geological structure,
the inhabitants are essentially American, though they may be all
peculiar species. We may look back to past ages, as shown in the last
chapter, and we find American types then prevailing on the American
continent and in the American seas. We see in these facts some deep
organic bond, throughout space and time, over the same areas of land and
water, independently of physical conditions. The naturalist must be dull
who is not led to inquire what this bond is.

The bond is simply inheritance, that cause which alone, as far as we
positively know, produces organisms quite like each other, or, as we
see in the case of varieties, nearly alike. The dissimilarity of the
inhabitants of different regions may be attributed to modification
through variation and natural selection, and probably in a subordinate
degree to the definite influence of different physical conditions.
The degrees of dissimilarity will depend on the migration of the more
dominant forms of life from one region into another having been more
or less effectually prevented, at periods more or less remote--on the
nature and number of the former immigrants--and on the action of the
inhabitants on each other in leading to the preservation of different
modifications; the relation of organism to organism in the struggle for
life being, as I have already often remarked, the most important of
all relations. Thus the high importance of barriers comes into play by
checking migration; as does time for the slow process of modification
through natural selection. Widely-ranging species, abounding in
individuals, which have already triumphed over many competitors in their
own widely-extended homes, will have the best chance of seizing on new
places, when they spread out into new countries. In their new homes they
will be exposed to new conditions, and will frequently undergo further
modification and improvement; and thus they will become still further
victorious, and will produce groups of modified descendants. On this
principle of inheritance with modification we can understand how it is
that sections of genera, whole genera, and even families, are confined
to the same areas, as is so commonly and notoriously the case.

There is no evidence, as was remarked in the last chapter, of the
existence of any law of necessary development. As the variability of
each species is an independent property, and will be taken advantage of
by natural selection, only so far as it profits each individual in its
complex struggle for life, so the amount of modification in different
species will be no uniform quantity. If a number of species, after
having long competed with each other in their old home, were to migrate
in a body into a new and afterwards isolated country, they would be
little liable to modification; for neither migration nor isolation in
themselves effect anything. These principles come into play only by
bringing organisms into new relations with each other and in a lesser
degree with the surrounding physical conditions. As we have seen in the
last chapter that some forms have retained nearly the same character
from an enormously remote geological period, so certain species have
migrated over vast spaces, and have not become greatly or at all
modified.

According to these views, it is obvious that the several species of the
same genus, though inhabiting the most distant quarters of the world,
must originally have proceeded from the same source, as they are
descended from the same progenitor. In the case of those species which
have undergone, during whole geological periods, little modification,
there is not much difficulty in believing that they have migrated from
the same region; for during the vast geographical and climatical
changes which have supervened since ancient times, almost any amount of
migration is possible. But in many other cases, in which we have
reason to believe that the species of a genus have been produced within
comparatively recent times, there is great difficulty on this head. It
is also obvious that the individuals of the same species, though now
inhabiting distant and isolated regions, must have proceeded from
one spot, where their parents were first produced: for, as has been
explained, it is incredible that individuals identically the same should
have been produced from parents specifically distinct.

SINGLE CENTRES OF SUPPOSED CREATION.

We are thus brought to the question which has been largely discussed by
naturalists, namely, whether species have been created at one or more
points of the earth's surface. Undoubtedly there are many cases of
extreme difficulty in understanding how the same species could possibly
have migrated from some one point to the several distant and isolated
points, where now found. Nevertheless the simplicity of the view that
each species was first produced within a single region captivates the
mind. He who rejects it, rejects the vera causa of ordinary generation
with subsequent migration, and calls in the agency of a miracle. It is
universally admitted, that in most cases the area inhabited by a species
is continuous; and that when a plant or animal inhabits two points so
distant from each other, or with an interval of such a nature, that the
space could not have been easily passed over by migration, the fact
is given as something remarkable and exceptional. The incapacity of
migrating across a wide sea is more clear in the case of terrestrial
mammals than perhaps with any other organic beings; and, accordingly,
we find no inexplicable instances of the same mammals inhabiting distant
points of the world. No geologist feels any difficulty in Great Britain
possessing the same quadrupeds with the rest of Europe, for they were
no doubt once united. But if the same species can be produced at two
separate points, why do we not find a single mammal common to Europe and
Australia or South America? The conditions of life are nearly the
same, so that a multitude of European animals and plants have become
naturalised in America and Australia; and some of the aboriginal plants
are identically the same at these distant points of the northern and
southern hemispheres? The answer, as I believe, is, that mammals have
not been able to migrate, whereas some plants, from their varied means
of dispersal, have migrated across the wide and broken interspaces. The
great and striking influence of barriers of all kinds, is intelligible
only on the view that the great majority of species have been produced
on one side, and have not been able to migrate to the opposite side.
Some few families, many subfamilies, very many genera, a still greater
number of sections of genera, are confined to a single region; and it
has been observed by several naturalists that the most natural genera,
or those genera in which the species are most closely related to each
other, are generally confined to the same country, or if they have a
wide range that their range is continuous. What a strange anomaly it
would be if a directly opposite rule were to prevail when we go down one
step lower in the series, namely to the individuals of the same species,
and these had not been, at least at first, confined to some one region!

Hence, it seems to me, as it has to many other naturalists, that the
view of each species having been produced in one area alone, and having
subsequently migrated from that area as far as its powers of migration
and subsistence under past and present conditions permitted, is the most
probable. Undoubtedly many cases occur in which we cannot explain how
the same species could have passed from one point to the other. But the
geographical and climatical changes which have certainly occurred within
recent geological times, must have rendered discontinuous the formerly
continuous range of many species. So that we are reduced to consider
whether the exceptions to continuity of range are so numerous, and of so
grave a nature, that we ought to give up the belief, rendered probable
by general considerations, that each species has been produced within
one area, and has migrated thence as far as it could. It would be
hopelessly tedious to discuss all the exceptional cases of the same
species, now living at distant and separated points; nor do I for a
moment pretend that any explanation could be offered of many instances.
But, after some preliminary remarks, I will discuss a few of the most
striking classes of facts, namely, the existence of the same species
on the summits of distant mountain ranges, and at distant points in the
Arctic and Antarctic regions; and secondly (in the following chapter),
the wide distribution of fresh water productions; and thirdly, the
occurrence of the same terrestrial species on islands and on the nearest
mainland, though separated by hundreds of miles of open sea. If the
existence of the same species at distant and isolated points of the
earth's surface can in many instances be explained on the view of each
species having migrated from a single birthplace; then, considering our
ignorance with respect to former climatical and geographical changes,
and to the various occasional means of transport, the belief that a
single birthplace is the law seems to me incomparably the safest.

In discussing this subject we shall be enabled at the same time to
consider a point equally important for us, namely, whether the several
species of a genus which must on our theory all be descended from a
common progenitor, can have migrated, undergoing modification during
their migration from some one area. If, when most of the species
inhabiting one region are different from those of another region, though
closely allied to them, it can be shown that migration from the one
region to the other has probably occurred at some former period, our
general view will be much strengthened; for the explanation is obvious
on the principle of descent with modification. A volcanic island, for
instance, upheaved and formed at the distance of a few hundreds of miles
from a continent, would probably receive from it in the course of time
a few colonists, and their descendants, though modified, would still be
related by inheritance to the inhabitants of that continent. Cases of
this nature are common, and are, as we shall hereafter see, inexplicable
on the theory of independent creation. This view of the relation of the
species of one region to those of another, does not differ much from
that advanced by Mr. Wallace, who concludes that "every species has come
into existence coincident both in space and time with a pre-existing
closely allied species." And it is now well known that he attributes
this coincidence to descent with modification.

The question of single or multiple centres of creation differs from
another though allied question, namely, whether all the individuals
of the same species are descended from a single pair, or single
hermaphrodite, or whether, as some authors suppose, from many
individuals simultaneously created. With organic beings which never
intercross, if such exist, each species, must be descended from a
succession of modified varieties, that have supplanted each other,
but have never blended with other individuals or varieties of the same
species, so that, at each successive stage of modification, all the
individuals of the same form will be descended from a single parent.
But in the great majority of cases, namely, with all organisms which
habitually unite for each birth, or which occasionally intercross, the
individuals of the same species inhabiting the same area will be kept
nearly uniform by intercrossing; so that many individuals will go on
simultaneously changing, and the whole amount of modification at each
stage will not be due to descent from a single parent. To illustrate
what I mean: our English race-horses differ from the horses of every
other breed; but they do not owe their difference and superiority to
descent from any single pair, but to continued care in the selecting and
training of many individuals during each generation.

Before discussing the three classes of facts, which I have selected as
presenting the greatest amount of difficulty on the theory of "single
centres of creation," I must say a few words on the means of dispersal.

MEANS OF DISPERSAL.

Sir C. Lyell and other authors have ably treated this subject. I can
give here only the briefest abstract of the more important facts. Change
of climate must have had a powerful influence on migration. A region now
impassable to certain organisms from the nature of its climate, might
have been a high road for migration, when the climate was different. I
shall, however, presently have to discuss this branch of the subject
in some detail. Changes of level in the land must also have been highly
influential: a narrow isthmus now separates two marine faunas; submerge
it, or let it formerly have been submerged, and the two faunas will now
blend together, or may formerly have blended. Where the sea now extends,
land may at a former period have connected islands or possibly even
continents together, and thus have allowed terrestrial productions to
pass from one to the other. No geologist disputes that great mutations
of level have occurred within the period of existing organisms. Edward
Forbes insisted that all the islands in the Atlantic must have been
recently connected with Europe or Africa, and Europe likewise with
America. Other authors have thus hypothetically bridged over every
ocean, and united almost every island with some mainland. If, indeed,
the arguments used by Forbes are to be trusted, it must be admitted that
scarcely a single island exists which has not recently been united to
some continent. This view cuts the Gordian knot of the dispersal of the
same species to the most distant points, and removes many a difficulty;
but to the best of my judgment we are not authorized in admitting such
enormous geographical changes within the period of existing species. It
seems to me that we have abundant evidence of great oscillations in the
level of the land or sea; but not of such vast changes in the position
and extension of our continents, as to have united them within the
recent period to each other and to the several intervening oceanic
islands. I freely admit the former existence of many islands, now buried
beneath the sea, which may have served as halting places for plants and
for many animals during their migration. In the coral-producing oceans
such sunken islands are now marked by rings of coral or atolls standing
over them. Whenever it is fully admitted, as it will some day be, that
each species has proceeded from a single birthplace, and when in
the course of time we know something definite about the means of
distribution, we shall be enabled to speculate with security on the
former extension of the land. But I do not believe that it will ever be
proved that within the recent period most of our continents which now
stand quite separate, have been continuously, or almost continuously
united with each other, and with the many existing oceanic islands.
Several facts in distribution--such as the great difference in the
marine faunas on the opposite sides of almost every continent--the close
relation of the tertiary inhabitants of several lands and even seas to
their present inhabitants--the degree of affinity between the mammals
inhabiting islands with those of the nearest continent, being in part
determined (as we shall hereafter see) by the depth of the intervening
ocean--these and other such facts are opposed to the admission of such
prodigious geographical revolutions within the recent period, as are
necessary on the view advanced by Forbes and admitted by his followers.
The nature and relative proportions of the inhabitants of oceanic
islands are likewise opposed to the belief of their former continuity of
continents. Nor does the almost universally volcanic composition of
such islands favour the admission that they are the wrecks of sunken
continents; if they had originally existed as continental mountain
ranges, some at least of the islands would have been formed, like other
mountain summits, of granite, metamorphic schists, old fossiliferous and
other rocks, instead of consisting of mere piles of volcanic matter.

I must now say a few words on what are called accidental means, but
which more properly should be called occasional means of distribution.
I shall here confine myself to plants. In botanical works, this or that
plant is often stated to be ill adapted for wide dissemination; but the
greater or less facilities for transport across the sea may be said to
be almost wholly unknown. Until I tried, with Mr. Berkeley's aid, a
few experiments, it was not even known how far seeds could resist
the injurious action of sea-water. To my surprise I found that out
of eighty-seven kinds, sixty-four germinated after an immersion of
twenty-eight days, and a few survived an immersion of 137 days. It
deserves notice that certain orders were far more injured than others:
nine Leguminosae were tried, and, with one exception, they resisted the
salt-water badly; seven species of the allied orders, Hydrophyllaceae
and Polemoniaceae, were all killed by a month's immersion. For
convenience sake I chiefly tried small seeds without the capsules or
fruit; and as all of these sank in a few days, they could not have been
floated across wide spaces of the sea, whether or not they were injured
by salt water. Afterwards I tried some larger fruits, capsules, etc.,
and some of these floated for a long time. It is well known what a
difference there is in the buoyancy of green and seasoned timber; and it
occurred to me that floods would often wash into the sea dried plants or
branches with seed-capsules or fruit attached to them. Hence I was led
to dry the stems and branches of ninety-four plants with ripe fruit, and
to place them on sea-water. The majority sank quickly, but some which,
whilst green, floated for a very short time, when dried floated much
longer; for instance, ripe hazel-nuts sank immediately, but when dried
they floated for ninety days, and afterwards when planted germinated;
an asparagus plant with ripe berries floated for twenty-three days,
when dried it floated for eighty-five days, and the seeds afterwards
germinated: the ripe seeds of Helosciadium sank in two days, when
dried they floated for above ninety days, and afterwards germinated.
Altogether, out of the ninety-four dried plants, eighteen floated for
above twenty-eight days; and some of the eighteen floated for a very
much longer period. So that as 64/87 kinds of seeds germinated after an
immersion of twenty-eight days; and as 18/94 distinct species with ripe
fruit (but not all the same species as in the foregoing experiment)
floated, after being dried, for above twenty-eight days, we may
conclude, as far as anything can be inferred from these scanty facts,
that the seeds of 14/100 kinds of plants of any country might be floated
by sea-currents during twenty-eight days, and would retain their power
of germination. In Johnston's Physical Atlas, the average rate of the
several Atlantic currents is thirty-three miles per diem (some currents
running at the rate of sixty miles per diem); on this average, the seeds
of 14/100 plants belonging to one country might be floated across 924
miles of sea to another country; and when stranded, if blown by an
inland gale to a favourable spot, would germinate.

Subsequently to my experiments, M. Martens tried similar ones, but in a
much better manner, for he placed the seeds in a box in the actual sea,
so that they were alternately wet and exposed to the air like really
floating plants. He tried ninety-eight seeds, mostly different from
mine, but he chose many large fruits, and likewise seeds, from plants
which live near the sea; and this would have favoured both the average
length of their flotation and their resistance to the injurious action
of the salt-water. On the other hand, he did not previously dry the
plants or branches with the fruit; and this, as we have seen, would have
caused some of them to have floated much longer. The result was that
18/98 of his seeds of different kinds floated for forty-two days, and
were then capable of germination. But I do not doubt that plants exposed
to the waves would float for a less time than those protected from
violent movement as in our experiments. Therefore, it would perhaps be
safer to assume that the seeds of about 10/100 plants of a flora, after
having been dried, could be floated across a space of sea 900 miles in
width, and would then germinate. The fact of the larger fruits often
floating longer than the small, is interesting; as plants with large
seeds or fruit which, as Alph. de Candolle has shown, generally have
restricted ranges, could hardly be transported by any other means.

Seeds may be occasionally transported in another manner. Drift timber
is thrown up on most islands, even on those in the midst of the widest
oceans; and the natives of the coral islands in the Pacific procure
stones for their tools, solely from the roots of drifted trees, these
stones being a valuable royal tax. I find that when irregularly shaped
stones are embedded in the roots of trees, small parcels of earth
are very frequently enclosed in their interstices and behind them, so
perfectly that not a particle could be washed away during the longest
transport: out of one small portion of earth thus COMPLETELY enclosed by
the roots of an oak about fifty years old, three dicotyledonous plants
germinated: I am certain of the accuracy of this observation. Again,
I can show that the carcasses of birds, when floating on the sea,
sometimes escape being immediately devoured; and many kinds of seeds
in the crops of floating birds long retain their vitality: peas and
vetches, for instance, are killed by even a few days' immersion in
sea-water; but some taken out of the crop of a pigeon, which had floated
on artificial sea-water for thirty days, to my surprise nearly all
germinated.

Living birds can hardly fail to be highly effective agents in the
transportation of seeds. I could give many facts showing how frequently
birds of many kinds are blown by gales to vast distances across the
ocean. We may safely assume that under such circumstances their rate of
flight would often be thirty-five miles an hour; and some authors have
given a far higher estimate. I have never seen an instance of nutritious
seeds passing through the intestines of a bird; but hard seeds of fruit
pass uninjured through even the digestive organs of a turkey. In the
course of two months, I picked up in my garden twelve kinds of seeds,
out of the excrement of small birds, and these seemed perfect, and some
of them, which were tried, germinated. But the following fact is more
important: the crops of birds do not secrete gastric juice, and do not,
as I know by trial, injure in the least the germination of seeds;
now, after a bird has found and devoured a large supply of food, it is
positively asserted that all the grains do not pass into the gizzard for
twelve or even eighteen hours. A bird in this interval might easily be
blown to the distance of five hundred miles, and hawks are known to look
out for tired birds, and the contents of their torn crops might thus
readily get scattered. Some hawks and owls bolt their prey whole, and
after an interval of from twelve to twenty hours, disgorge pellets,
which, as I know from experiments made in the Zoological Gardens,
include seeds capable of germination. Some seeds of the oat, wheat,
millet, canary, hemp, clover, and beet germinated after having been from
twelve to twenty-one hours in the stomachs of different birds of prey;
and two seeds of beet grew after having been thus retained for two days
and fourteen hours. Fresh-water fish, I find, eat seeds of many land and
water plants; fish are frequently devoured by birds, and thus the seeds
might be transported from place to place. I forced many kinds of
seeds into the stomachs of dead fish, and then gave their bodies to
fishing-eagles, storks, and pelicans; these birds, after an interval of
many hours, either rejected the seeds in pellets or passed them in their
excrement; and several of these seeds retained the power of germination.
Certain seeds, however, were always killed by this process.

Locusts are sometimes blown to great distances from the land. I myself
caught one 370 miles from the coast of Africa, and have heard of others
caught at greater distances. The Rev. R.T. Lowe informed Sir C. Lyell
that in November, 1844, swarms of locusts visited the island of Madeira.
They were in countless numbers, as thick as the flakes of snow in the
heaviest snowstorm, and extended upward as far as could be seen with a
telescope. During two or three days they slowly careered round and round
in an immense ellipse, at least five or six miles in diameter, and at
night alighted on the taller trees, which were completely coated with
them. They then disappeared over the sea, as suddenly as they had
appeared, and have not since visited the island. Now, in parts of Natal
it is believed by some farmers, though on insufficient evidence, that
injurious seeds are introduced into their grass-land in the dung left
by the great flights of locusts which often visit that country. In
consequence of this belief Mr. Weale sent me in a letter a small packet
of the dried pellets, out of which I extracted under the microscope
several seeds, and raised from them seven grass plants, belonging to
two species, of two genera. Hence a swarm of locusts, such as that which
visited Madeira, might readily be the means of introducing several kinds
of plants into an island lying far from the mainland.

Although the beaks and feet of birds are generally clean, earth
sometimes adheres to them: in one case I removed sixty-one grains, and
in another case twenty-two grains of dry argillaceous earth from the
foot of a partridge, and in the earth there was a pebble as large as the
seed of a vetch. Here is a better case: the leg of a woodcock was sent
to me by a friend, with a little cake of dry earth attached to the
shank, weighing only nine grains; and this contained a seed of
the toad-rush (Juncus bufonius) which germinated and flowered. Mr.
Swaysland, of Brighton, who during the last forty years has paid close
attention to our migratory birds, informs me that he has often shot
wagtails (Motacillae), wheatears, and whinchats (Saxicolae), on their
first arrival on our shores, before they had alighted; and he has
several times noticed little cakes of earth attached to their feet. Many
facts could be given showing how generally soil is charged with seeds.
For instance, Professor Newton sent me the leg of a red-legged partridge
(Caccabis rufa) which had been wounded and could not fly, with a ball of
hard earth adhering to it, and weighing six and a half ounces. The earth
had been kept for three years, but when broken, watered and placed
under a bell glass, no less than eighty-two plants sprung from it: these
consisted of twelve monocotyledons, including the common oat, and at
least one kind of grass, and of seventy dicotyledons, which consisted,
judging from the young leaves, of at least three distinct species.
With such facts before us, can we doubt that the many birds which are
annually blown by gales across great spaces of ocean, and which
annually migrate--for instance, the millions of quails across the
Mediterranean--must occasionally transport a few seeds embedded in
dirt adhering to their feet or beaks? But I shall have to recur to this
subject.

As icebergs are known to be sometimes loaded with earth and stones, and
have even carried brushwood, bones, and the nest of a land-bird, it can
hardly be doubted that they must occasionally, as suggested by Lyell,
have transported seeds from one part to another of the arctic and
antarctic regions; and during the Glacial period from one part of the
now temperate regions to another. In the Azores, from the large number
of plants common to Europe, in comparison with the species on the other
islands of the Atlantic, which stand nearer to the mainland, and (as
remarked by Mr. H.C. Watson) from their somewhat northern character, in
comparison with the latitude, I suspected that these islands had been
partly stocked by ice-borne seeds during the Glacial epoch. At my
request Sir C. Lyell wrote to M. Hartung to inquire whether he had
observed erratic boulders on these islands, and he answered that he had
found large fragments of granite and other rocks, which do not occur in
the archipelago. Hence we may safely infer that icebergs formerly landed
their rocky burdens on the shores of these mid-ocean islands, and it
is at least possible that they may have brought thither the seeds of
northern plants.

Considering that these several means of transport, and that other means,
which without doubt remain to be discovered, have been in action year
after year for tens of thousands of years, it would, I think, be a
marvellous fact if many plants had not thus become widely transported.
These means of transport are sometimes called accidental, but this is
not strictly correct: the currents of the sea are not accidental, nor
is the direction of prevalent gales of wind. It should be observed
that scarcely any means of transport would carry seeds for very great
distances; for seeds do not retain their vitality when exposed for a
great length of time to the action of sea water; nor could they be long
carried in the crops or intestines of birds. These means, however, would
suffice for occasional transport across tracts of sea some hundred
miles in breadth, or from island to island, or from a continent to a
neighbouring island, but not from one distant continent to another. The
floras of distant continents would not by such means become mingled;
but would remain as distinct as they now are. The currents, from their
course, would never bring seeds from North America to Britain, though
they might and do bring seeds from the West Indies to our western
shores, where, if not killed by their very long immersion in salt
water, they could not endure our climate. Almost every year, one or two
land-birds are blown across the whole Atlantic Ocean, from North
America to the western shores of Ireland and England; but seeds could be
transported by these rare wanderers only by one means, namely, by dirt
adhering to their feet or beaks, which is in itself a rare accident.
Even in this case, how small would be the chance of a seed falling on
favourable soil, and coming to maturity! But it would be a great error
to argue that because a well-stocked island, like Great Britain, has
not, as far as is known (and it would be very difficult to prove this),
received within the last few centuries, through occasional means
of transport, immigrants from Europe or any other continent, that a
poorly-stocked island, though standing more remote from the mainland,
would not receive colonists by similar means. Out of a hundred kinds of
seeds or animals transported to an island, even if far less well-stocked
than Britain, perhaps not more than one would be so well fitted to
its new home, as to become naturalised. But this is no valid argument
against what would be effected by occasional means of transport, during
the long lapse of geological time, whilst the island was being upheaved,
and before it had become fully stocked with inhabitants. On almost bare
land, with few or no destructive insects or birds living there, nearly
every seed which chanced to arrive, if fitted for the climate, would
germinate and survive.

DISPERSAL DURING THE GLACIAL PERIOD.

The identity of many plants and animals, on mountain-summits, separated
from each other by hundreds of miles of lowlands, where Alpine species
could not possibly exist, is one of the most striking cases known of the
same species living at distant points, without the apparent possibility
of their having migrated from one point to the other. It is indeed a
remarkable fact to see so many plants of the same species living on the
snowy regions of the Alps or Pyrenees, and in the extreme northern parts
of Europe; but it is far more remarkable, that the plants on the White
Mountains, in the United States of America, are all the same with those
of Labrador, and nearly all the same, as we hear from Asa Gray, with
those on the loftiest mountains of Europe. Even as long ago as 1747,
such facts led Gmelin to conclude that the same species must have
been independently created at many distinct points; and we might have
remained in this same belief, had not Agassiz and others called vivid
attention to the Glacial period, which, as we shall immediately see,
affords a simple explanation of these facts. We have evidence of almost
every conceivable kind, organic and inorganic, that, within a very
recent geological period, central Europe and North America suffered
under an Arctic climate. The ruins of a house burnt by fire do not tell
their tale more plainly than do the mountains of Scotland and Wales,
with their scored flanks, polished surfaces, and perched boulders, of
the icy streams with which their valleys were lately filled. So greatly
has the climate of Europe changed, that in Northern Italy, gigantic
moraines, left by old glaciers, are now clothed by the vine and maize.
Throughout a large part of the United States, erratic boulders and
scored rocks plainly reveal a former cold period.

The former influence of the glacial climate on the distribution of the
inhabitants of Europe, as explained by Edward Forbes, is substantially
as follows. But we shall follow the changes more readily, by supposing
a new glacial period slowly to come on, and then pass away, as formerly
occurred. As the cold came on, and as each more southern zone became
fitted for the inhabitants of the north, these would take the places of
the former inhabitants of the temperate regions. The latter, at the
same time would travel further and further southward, unless they were
stopped by barriers, in which case they would perish. The mountains
would become covered with snow and ice, and their former Alpine
inhabitants would descend to the plains. By the time that the cold had
reached its maximum, we should have an arctic fauna and flora, covering
the central parts of Europe, as far south as the Alps and Pyrenees,
and even stretching into Spain. The now temperate regions of the United
States would likewise be covered by arctic plants and animals and
these would be nearly the same with those of Europe; for the present
circumpolar inhabitants, which we suppose to have everywhere travelled
southward, are remarkably uniform round the world.

As the warmth returned, the arctic forms would retreat northward,
closely followed up in their retreat by the productions of the more
temperate regions. And as the snow melted from the bases of the
mountains, the arctic forms would seize on the cleared and thawed
ground, always ascending, as the warmth increased and the snow still
further disappeared, higher and higher, whilst their brethren were
pursuing their northern journey. Hence, when the warmth had fully
returned, the same species, which had lately lived together on the
European and North American lowlands, would again be found in the arctic
regions of the Old and New Worlds, and on many isolated mountain-summits
far distant from each other.

Thus we can understand the identity of many plants at points so
immensely remote as the mountains of the United States and those of
Europe. We can thus also understand the fact that the Alpine plants
of each mountain-range are more especially related to the arctic forms
living due north or nearly due north of them: for the first migration
when the cold came on, and the re-migration on the returning warmth,
would generally have been due south and north. The Alpine plants, for
example, of Scotland, as remarked by Mr. H.C. Watson, and those of
the Pyrenees, as remarked by Ramond, are more especially allied to the
plants of northern Scandinavia; those of the United States to Labrador;
those of the mountains of Siberia to the arctic regions of that country.
These views, grounded as they are on the perfectly well-ascertained
occurrence of a former Glacial period, seem to me to explain in so
satisfactory a manner the present distribution of the Alpine and Arctic
productions of Europe and America, that when in other regions we find
the same species on distant mountain-summits, we may almost conclude,
without other evidence, that a colder climate formerly permitted their
migration across the intervening lowlands, now become too warm for their
existence.

As the arctic forms moved first southward and afterwards backward to
the north, in unison with the changing climate, they will not have
been exposed during their long migrations to any great diversity of
temperature; and as they all migrated in a body together, their mutual
relations will not have been much disturbed. Hence, in accordance with
the principles inculcated in this volume, these forms will not have
been liable to much modification. But with the Alpine productions, left
isolated from the moment of the returning warmth, first at the bases
and ultimately on the summits of the mountains, the case will have
been somewhat different; for it is not likely that all the same arctic
species will have been left on mountain ranges far distant from each
other, and have survived there ever since; they will also, in all
probability, have become mingled with ancient Alpine species, which must
have existed on the mountains before the commencement of the Glacial
epoch, and which during the coldest period will have been temporarily
driven down to the plains; they will, also, have been subsequently
exposed to somewhat different climatical influences. Their mutual
relations will thus have been in some degree disturbed; consequently
they will have been liable to modification; and they have been modified;
for if we compare the present Alpine plants and animals of the several
great European mountain ranges, one with another, though many of the
species remain identically the same, some exist as varieties, some as
doubtful forms or sub-species and some as distinct yet closely allied
species representing each other on the several ranges.

In the foregoing illustration, I have assumed that at the commencement
of our imaginary Glacial period, the arctic productions were as uniform
round the polar regions as they are at the present day. But it is also
necessary to assume that many sub-arctic and some few temperate forms
were the same round the world, for some of the species which now exist
on the lower mountain slopes and on the plains of North America and
Europe are the same; and it may be asked how I account for this degree
of uniformity of the sub-arctic and temperate forms round the world,
at the commencement of the real Glacial period. At the present day, the
sub-arctic and northern temperate productions of the Old and New Worlds
are separated from each other by the whole Atlantic Ocean and by the
northern part of the Pacific. During the Glacial period, when the
inhabitants of the Old and New Worlds lived further southwards than they
do at present, they must have been still more completely separated from
each other by wider spaces of ocean; so that it may well be asked
how the same species could then or previously have entered the two
continents. The explanation, I believe, lies in the nature of the
climate before the commencement of the Glacial period. At this, the
newer Pliocene period, the majority of the inhabitants of the world were
specifically the same as now, and we have good reason to believe that
the climate was warmer than at the present day. Hence, we may suppose
that the organisms which now live under latitude 60 degrees, lived
during the Pliocene period further north, under the Polar Circle, in
latitude 66-67 degrees; and that the present arctic productions then
lived on the broken land still nearer to the pole. Now, if we look at
a terrestrial globe, we see under the Polar Circle that there is almost
continuous land from western Europe through Siberia, to eastern America.
And this continuity of the circumpolar land, with the consequent freedom
under a more favourable climate for intermigration, will account for the
supposed uniformity of the sub-arctic and temperate productions of the
Old and New Worlds, at a period anterior to the Glacial epoch.

Believing, from reasons before alluded to, that our continents have long
remained in nearly the same relative position, though subjected to great
oscillations of level, I am strongly inclined to extend the above view,
and to infer that during some earlier and still warmer period, such as
the older Pliocene period, a large number of the same plants and animals
inhabited the almost continuous circumpolar land; and that these plants
and animals, both in the Old and New Worlds, began slowly to migrate
southwards as the climate became less warm, long before the commencement
of the Glacial period. We now see, as I believe, their descendants,
mostly in a modified condition, in the central parts of Europe and the
United States. On this view we can understand the relationship with very
little identity, between the productions of North America and Europe--a
relationship which is highly remarkable, considering the distance of
the two areas, and their separation by the whole Atlantic Ocean. We can
further understand the singular fact remarked on by several observers
that the productions of Europe and America during the later tertiary
stages were more closely related to each other than they are at the
present time; for during these warmer periods the northern parts of the
Old and New Worlds will have been almost continuously united by
land, serving as a bridge, since rendered impassable by cold, for the
intermigration of their inhabitants.

During the slowly decreasing warmth of the Pliocene period, as soon as
the species in common, which inhabited the New and Old Worlds, migrated
south of the Polar Circle, they will have been completely cut off from
each other. This separation, as far as the more temperate productions
are concerned, must have taken place long ages ago. As the plants and
animals migrated southward, they will have become mingled in the one
great region with the native American productions, and would have had to
compete with them; and in the other great region, with those of the
Old World. Consequently we have here everything favourable for
much modification--for far more modification than with the Alpine
productions, left isolated, within a much more recent period, on the
several mountain ranges and on the arctic lands of Europe and North
America. Hence, it has come, that when we compare the now living
productions of the temperate regions of the New and Old Worlds, we find
very few identical species (though Asa Gray has lately shown that more
plants are identical than was formerly supposed), but we find in every
great class many forms, which some naturalists rank as geographical
races, and others as distinct species; and a host of closely allied or
representative forms which are ranked by all naturalists as specifically
distinct.

As on the land, so in the waters of the sea, a slow southern migration
of a marine fauna, which, during the Pliocene or even a somewhat earlier
period, was nearly uniform along the continuous shores of the Polar
Circle, will account, on the theory of modification, for many closely
allied forms now living in marine areas completely sundered. Thus, I
think, we can understand the presence of some closely allied, still
existing and extinct tertiary forms, on the eastern and western shores
of temperate North America; and the still more striking fact of many
closely allied crustaceans (as described in Dana's admirable work), some
fish and other marine animals, inhabiting the Mediterranean and the seas
of Japan--these two areas being now completely separated by the breadth
of a whole continent and by wide spaces of ocean.

These cases of close relationship in species either now or formerly
inhabiting the seas on the eastern and western shores of North America,
the Mediterranean and Japan, and the temperate lands of North America
and Europe, are inexplicable on the theory of creation. We cannot
maintain that such species have been created alike, in correspondence
with the nearly similar physical conditions of the areas; for if we
compare, for instance, certain parts of South America with parts of
South Africa or Australia, we see countries closely similar in all their
physical conditions, with their inhabitants utterly dissimilar.

ALTERNATE GLACIAL PERIODS IN THE NORTH AND SOUTH.

But we must return to our more immediate subject. I am convinced that
Forbes's view may be largely extended. In Europe we meet with the
plainest evidence of the Glacial period, from the western shores of
Britain to the Ural range, and southward to the Pyrenees. We may infer
from the frozen mammals and nature of the mountain vegetation, that
Siberia was similarly affected. In the Lebanon, according to Dr. Hooker,
perpetual snow formerly covered the central axis, and fed glaciers which
rolled 4,000 feet down the valleys. The same observer has recently found
great moraines at a low level on the Atlas range in North Africa. Along
the Himalaya, at points 900 miles apart, glaciers have left the marks of
their former low descent; and in Sikkim, Dr. Hooker saw maize growing
on ancient and gigantic moraines. Southward of the Asiatic continent, on
the opposite side of the equator, we know, from the excellent researches
of Dr. J. Haast and Dr. Hector, that in New Zealand immense glaciers
formerly descended to a low level; and the same plants, found by Dr.
Hooker on widely separated mountains in this island tell the same story
of a former cold period. From facts communicated to me by the Rev. W.B.
Clarke, it appears also that there are traces of former glacial action
on the mountains of the south-eastern corner of Australia.

Looking to America: in the northern half, ice-borne fragments of rock
have been observed on the eastern side of the continent, as far south as
latitude 36 and 37 degrees, and on the shores of the Pacific, where
the climate is now so different, as far south as latitude 46 degrees.
Erratic boulders have, also, been noticed on the Rocky Mountains. In
the Cordillera of South America, nearly under the equator, glaciers once
extended far below their present level. In central Chile I examined
a vast mound of detritus with great boulders, crossing the Portillo
valley, which, there can hardly be a doubt, once formed a huge moraine;
and Mr. D. Forbes informs me that he found in various parts of the
Cordillera, from latitude 13 to 30 degrees south, at about the height of
12,000 feet, deeply-furrowed rocks, resembling those with which he was
familiar in Norway, and likewise great masses of detritus, including
grooved pebbles. Along this whole space of the Cordillera true glaciers
do not now exist even at much more considerable heights. Further
south, on both sides of the continent, from latitude 41 degrees to the
southernmost extremity, we have the clearest evidence of former glacial
action, in numerous immense boulders transported far from their parent
source.

From these several facts, namely, from the glacial action having
extended all round the northern and southern hemispheres--from
the period having been in a geological sense recent in both
hemispheres--from its having lasted in both during a great length of
time, as may be inferred from the amount of work effected--and lastly,
from glaciers having recently descended to a low level along the whole
line of the Cordillera, it at one time appeared to me that we could not
avoid the conclusion that the temperature of the whole world had been
simultaneously lowered during the Glacial period. But now, Mr. Croll,
in a series of admirable memoirs, has attempted to show that a glacial
condition of climate is the result of various physical causes, brought
into operation by an increase in the eccentricity of the earth's orbit.
All these causes tend towards the same end; but the most powerful
appears to be the indirect influence of the eccentricity of the orbit
upon oceanic currents. According to Mr. Croll, cold periods regularly
recur every ten or fifteen thousand years; and these at long intervals
are extremely severe, owing to certain contingencies, of which the most
important, as Sir C. Lyell has shown, is the relative position of the
land and water. Mr. Croll believes that the last great glacial period
occurred about 240,000 years ago, and endured, with slight alterations
of climate, for about 160,000 years. With respect to more ancient
glacial periods, several geologists are convinced, from direct evidence,
that such occurred during the miocene and eocene formations, not to
mention still more ancient formations. But the most important result for
us, arrived at by Mr. Croll, is that whenever the northern hemisphere
passes through a cold period the temperature of the southern hemisphere
is actually raised, with the winters rendered much milder, chiefly
through changes in the direction of the ocean currents. So conversely it
will be with the northern hemisphere, while the southern passes through
a glacial period. This conclusion throws so much light on geographical
distribution that I am strongly inclined to trust in it; but I will
first give the facts which demand an explanation.

In South America, Dr. Hooker has shown that besides many closely allied
species, between forty and fifty of the flowering plants of Tierra del
Fuego, forming no inconsiderable part of its scanty flora, are common to
North America and Europe, enormously remote as these areas in opposite
hemispheres are from each other. On the lofty mountains of equatorial
America a host of peculiar species belonging to European genera occur.
On the Organ Mountains of Brazil some few temperate European, some
Antarctic and some Andean genera were found by Gardner which do not
exist in the low intervening hot countries. On the Silla of Caraccas
the illustrious Humboldt long ago found species belonging to genera
characteristic of the Cordillera.

In Africa, several forms characteristic of Europe, and some few
representatives of the flora of the Cape of Good Hope, occur on the
mountains of Abyssinia. At the Cape of Good Hope a very few European
species, believed not to have been introduced by man, and on the
mountains several representative European forms are found which have
not been discovered in the intertropical parts of Africa. Dr. Hooker has
also lately shown that several of the plants living on the upper parts
of the lofty island of Fernando Po, and on the neighbouring Cameroon
Mountains, in the Gulf of Guinea, are closely related to those on the
mountains of Abyssinia, and likewise to those of temperate Europe. It
now also appears, as I hear from Dr. Hooker, that some of these same
temperate plants have been discovered by the Rev. R.T. Lowe on the
mountains of the Cape Verde Islands. This extension of the same
temperate forms, almost under the equator, across the whole continent of
Africa and to the mountains of the Cape Verde archipelago, is one of the
most astonishing facts ever recorded in the distribution of plants.

On the Himalaya, and on the isolated mountain ranges of the peninsula of
India, on the heights of Ceylon, and on the volcanic cones of Java, many
plants occur either identically the same or representing each other,
and at the same time representing plants of Europe not found in the
intervening hot lowlands. A list of the genera of plants collected on
the loftier peaks of Java, raises a picture of a collection made on
a hillock in Europe. Still more striking is the fact that peculiar
Australian forms are represented by certain plants growing on the
summits of the mountains of Borneo. Some of these Australian forms, as
I hear from Dr. Hooker, extend along the heights of the peninsula of
Malacca, and are thinly scattered on the one hand over India, and on the
other hand as far north as Japan.

On the southern mountains of Australia, Dr. F. Muller has discovered
several European species; other species, not introduced by man, occur
on the lowlands; and a long list can be given, as I am informed by
Dr. Hooker, of European genera, found in Australia, but not in the
intermediate torrid regions. In the admirable "Introduction to the Flora
of New Zealand," by Dr. Hooker, analogous and striking facts are given
in regard to the plants of that large island. Hence, we see that certain
plants growing on the more lofty mountains of the tropics in all parts
of the world, and on the temperate plains of the north and south, are
either the same species or varieties of the same species. It should,
however, be observed that these plants are not strictly arctic forms;
for, as Mr. H.C. Watson has remarked, "in receding from polar toward
equatorial latitudes, the Alpine or mountain flora really become less
and less Arctic." Besides these identical and closely allied forms, many
species inhabiting the same widely sundered areas, belong to genera not
now found in the intermediate tropical lowlands.

These brief remarks apply to plants alone; but some few analogous facts
could be given in regard to terrestrial animals. In marine productions,
similar cases likewise occur; as an example, I may quote a statement
by the highest authority, Prof. Dana, that "it is certainly a wonderful
fact that New Zealand should have a closer resemblance in its crustacea
to Great Britain, its antipode, than to any other part of the world."
Sir J. Richardson, also, speaks of the reappearance on the shores of New
Zealand, Tasmania, etc., of northern forms of fish. Dr. Hooker informs
me that twenty-five species of Algae are common to New Zealand and to
Europe, but have not been found in the intermediate tropical seas.

From the foregoing facts, namely, the presence of temperate forms
on the highlands across the whole of equatorial Africa, and along the
Peninsula of India, to Ceylon and the Malay Archipelago, and in a less
well-marked manner across the wide expanse of tropical South America, it
appears almost certain that at some former period, no doubt during
the most severe part of a Glacial period, the lowlands of these great
continents were everywhere tenanted under the equator by a considerable
number of temperate forms. At this period the equatorial climate at the
level of the sea was probably about the same with that now experienced
at the height of from five to six thousand feet under the same latitude,
or perhaps even rather cooler. During this, the coldest period, the
lowlands under the equator must have been clothed with a mingled
tropical and temperate vegetation, like that described by Hooker as
growing luxuriantly at the height of from four to five thousand feet
on the lower slopes of the Himalaya, but with perhaps a still greater
preponderance of temperate forms. So again in the mountainous island of
Fernando Po, in the Gulf of Guinea, Mr. Mann found temperate European
forms beginning to appear at the height of about five thousand feet. On
the mountains of Panama, at the height of only two thousand feet, Dr.
Seemann found the vegetation like that of Mexico, "with forms of the
torrid zone harmoniously blended with those of the temperate."

Now let us see whether Mr. Croll's conclusion that when the northern
hemisphere suffered from the extreme cold of the great Glacial period,
the southern hemisphere was actually warmer, throws any clear light on
the present apparently inexplicable distribution of various organisms
in the temperate parts of both hemispheres, and on the mountains of the
tropics. The Glacial period, as measured by years, must have been very
long; and when we remember over what vast spaces some naturalised plants
and animals have spread within a few centuries, this period will have
been ample for any amount of migration. As the cold became more and more
intense, we know that Arctic forms invaded the temperate regions; and
from the facts just given, there can hardly be a doubt that some of the
more vigorous, dominant and widest-spreading temperate forms invaded the
equatorial lowlands. The inhabitants of these hot lowlands would at the
same time have migrated to the tropical and subtropical regions of the
south, for the southern hemisphere was at this period warmer. On the
decline of the Glacial period, as both hemispheres gradually recovered
their former temperature, the northern temperate forms living on the
lowlands under the equator, would have been driven to their former homes
or have been destroyed, being replaced by the equatorial forms returning
from the south. Some, however, of the northern temperate forms would
almost certainly have ascended any adjoining high land, where, if
sufficiently lofty, they would have long survived like the Arctic
forms on the mountains of Europe. They might have survived, even if the
climate was not perfectly fitted for them, for the change of temperature
must have been very slow, and plants undoubtedly possess a certain
capacity for acclimatisation, as shown by their transmitting to their
offspring different constitutional powers of resisting heat and cold.

In the regular course of events the southern hemisphere would in
its turn be subjected to a severe Glacial period, with the northern
hemisphere rendered warmer; and then the southern temperate forms would
invade the equatorial lowlands. The northern forms which had before been
left on the mountains would now descend and mingle with the southern
forms. These latter, when the warmth returned, would return to their
former homes, leaving some few species on the mountains, and carrying
southward with them some of the northern temperate forms which had
descended from their mountain fastnesses. Thus, we should have some
few species identically the same in the northern and southern temperate
zones and on the mountains of the intermediate tropical regions. But
the species left during a long time on these mountains, or in opposite
hemispheres, would have to compete with many new forms and would be
exposed to somewhat different physical conditions; hence, they would
be eminently liable to modification, and would generally now exist as
varieties or as representative species; and this is the case. We must,
also, bear in mind the occurrence in both hemispheres of former Glacial
periods; for these will account, in accordance with the same principles,
for the many quite distinct species inhabiting the same widely separated
areas, and belonging to genera not now found in the intermediate torrid
zones.

It is a remarkable fact, strongly insisted on by Hooker in regard to
America, and by Alph. de Candolle in regard to Australia, that many more
identical or slightly modified species have migrated from the north to
the south, than in a reversed direction. We see, however, a few southern
forms on the mountains of Borneo and Abyssinia. I suspect that this
preponderant migration from the north to the south is due to the greater
extent of land in the north, and to the northern forms having existed
in their own homes in greater numbers, and having consequently been
advanced through natural selection and competition to a higher stage of
perfection, or dominating power, than the southern forms. And thus, when
the two sets became commingled in the equatorial regions, during the
alternations of the Glacial periods, the northern forms were the more
powerful and were able to hold their places on the mountains, and
afterwards migrate southward with the southern forms; but not so the
southern in regard to the northern forms. In the same manner, at the
present day, we see that very many European productions cover the ground
in La Plata, New Zealand, and to a lesser degree in Australia, and have
beaten the natives; whereas extremely few southern forms have become
naturalised in any part of the northern hemisphere, though hides, wool,
and other objects likely to carry seeds have been largely imported into
Europe during the last two or three centuries from La Plata and during
the last forty or fifty years from Australia. The Neilgherrie Mountains
in India, however, offer a partial exception; for here, as I hear from
Dr. Hooker, Australian forms are rapidly sowing themselves and becoming
naturalised. Before the last great Glacial period, no doubt the
intertropical mountains were stocked with endemic Alpine forms;
but these have almost everywhere yielded to the more dominant forms
generated in the larger areas and more efficient workshops of the north.
In many islands the native productions are nearly equalled, or even
outnumbered, by those which have become naturalised; and this is the
first stage towards their extinction. Mountains are islands on the land;
and their inhabitants have yielded to those produced within the larger
areas of the north, just in the same way as the inhabitants of real
islands have everywhere yielded and are still yielding to continental
forms naturalised through man's agency.

The same principles apply to the distribution of terrestrial animals and
of marine productions, in the northern and southern temperate zones, and
on the intertropical mountains. When, during the height of the Glacial
period, the ocean-currents were widely different to what they now are,
some of the inhabitants of the temperate seas might have reached
the equator; of these a few would perhaps at once be able to migrate
southwards, by keeping to the cooler currents, while others might remain
and survive in the colder depths until the southern hemisphere was in
its turn subjected to a glacial climate and permitted their further
progress; in nearly the same manner as, according to Forbes, isolated
spaces inhabited by Arctic productions exist to the present day in the
deeper parts of the northern temperate seas.

I am far from supposing that all the difficulties in regard to the
distribution and affinities of the identical and allied species, which
now live so widely separated in the north and south, and sometimes on
the intermediate mountain ranges, are removed on the views above given.
The exact lines of migration cannot be indicated. We cannot say why
certain species and not others have migrated; why certain species
have been modified and have given rise to new forms, while others have
remained unaltered. We cannot hope to explain such facts, until we can
say why one species and not another becomes naturalised by man's agency
in a foreign land; why one species ranges twice or thrice as far, and is
twice or thrice as common, as another species within their own homes.

Various special difficulties also remain to be solved; for instance,
the occurrence, as shown by Dr. Hooker, of the same plants at points
so enormously remote as Kerguelen Land, New Zealand, and Fuegia; but
icebergs, as suggested by Lyell, may have been concerned in their
dispersal. The existence at these and other distant points of the
southern hemisphere, of species, which, though distinct, belong to
genera exclusively confined to the south, is a more remarkable case.
Some of these species are so distinct, that we cannot suppose that there
has been time since the commencement of the last Glacial period for
their migration and subsequent modification to the necessary degree.
The facts seem to indicate that distinct species belonging to the same
genera have migrated in radiating lines from a common centre; and I am
inclined to look in the southern, as in the northern hemisphere, to a
former and warmer period, before the commencement of the last Glacial
period, when the Antarctic lands, now covered with ice, supported a
highly peculiar and isolated flora. It may be suspected that before this
flora was exterminated during the last Glacial epoch, a few forms
had been already widely dispersed to various points of the southern
hemisphere by occasional means of transport, and by the aid, as
halting-places, of now sunken islands. Thus the southern shores of
America, Australia, and New Zealand may have become slightly tinted by
the same peculiar forms of life.

Sir C. Lyell in a striking passage has speculated, in language almost
identical with mine, on the effects of great alternations of climate
throughout the world on geographical distribution. And we have now seen
that Mr. Croll's conclusion that successive Glacial periods in the one
hemisphere coincide with warmer periods in the opposite hemisphere,
together with the admission of the slow modification of species,
explains a multitude of facts in the distribution of the same and of the
allied forms of life in all parts of the globe. The living waters have
flowed during one period from the north and during another from the
south, and in both cases have reached the equator; but the stream of
life has flowed with greater force from the north than in the opposite
direction, and has consequently more freely inundated the south. As the
tide leaves its drift in horizontal lines, rising higher on the shores
where the tide rises highest, so have the living waters left their
living drift on our mountain summits, in a line gently rising from
the Arctic lowlands to a great latitude under the equator. The various
beings thus left stranded may be compared with savage races of man,
driven up and surviving in the mountain fastnesses of almost every
land, which serves as a record, full of interest to us, of the former
inhabitants of the surrounding lowlands.




CHAPTER XIII. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION--continued.

 Distribution of fresh-water productions--On the inhabitants of oceanic
 islands--Absence of Batrachians and of terrestrial Mammals--On
 the relation of the inhabitants of islands to those of the nearest
 mainland--On colonisation from the nearest source with subsequent
 modification--Summary of the last and present chapters.


FRESH-WATER PRODUCTIONS.

As lakes and river-systems are separated from each other by barriers of
land, it might have been thought that fresh-water productions would not
have ranged widely within the same country, and as the sea is apparently
a still more formidable barrier, that they would never have extended to
distant countries. But the case is exactly the reverse. Not only have
many fresh-water species, belonging to different classes, an enormous
range, but allied species prevail in a remarkable manner throughout
the world. When first collecting in the fresh waters of Brazil, I well
remember feeling much surprise at the similarity of the fresh-water
insects, shells, etc., and at the dissimilarity of the surrounding
terrestrial beings, compared with those of Britain.

But the wide ranging power of fresh-water productions can, I think,
in most cases be explained by their having become fitted, in a manner
highly useful to them, for short and frequent migrations from pond
to pond, or from stream to stream, within their own countries; and
liability to wide dispersal would follow from this capacity as an almost
necessary consequence. We can here consider only a few cases; of these,
some of the most difficult to explain are presented by fish. It was
formerly believed that the same fresh-water species never existed on
two continents distant from each other. But Dr. Gunther has lately
shown that the Galaxias attenuatus inhabits Tasmania, New Zealand, the
Falkland Islands and the mainland of South America. This is a wonderful
case, and probably indicates dispersal from an Antarctic centre during a
former warm period. This case, however, is rendered in some degree less
surprising by the species of this genus having the power of crossing by
some unknown means considerable spaces of open ocean: thus there is
one species common to New Zealand and to the Auckland Islands, though
separated by a distance of about 230 miles. On the same continent
fresh-water fish often range widely, and as if capriciously; for in two
adjoining river systems some of the species may be the same and some
wholly different.

It is probable that they are occasionally transported by what may be
called accidental means. Thus fishes still alive are not very rarely
dropped at distant points by whirlwinds; and it is known that the ova
retain their vitality for a considerable time after removal from the
water. Their dispersal may, however, be mainly attributed to changes in
the level of the land within the recent period, causing rivers to flow
into each other. Instances, also, could be given of this having occurred
during floods, without any change of level. The wide differences of the
fish on the opposite sides of most mountain-ranges, which are continuous
and consequently must, from an early period, have completely prevented
the inosculation of the river systems on the two sides, leads to the
same conclusion. Some fresh-water fish belong to very ancient forms,
and in such cases there will have been ample time for great geographical
changes, and consequently time and means for much migration. Moreover,
Dr. Gunther has recently been led by several considerations to infer
that with fishes the same forms have a long endurance. Salt-water
fish can with care be slowly accustomed to live in fresh water; and,
according to Valenciennes, there is hardly a single group of which
all the members are confined to fresh water, so that a marine species
belonging to a fresh-water group might travel far along the shores
of the sea, and could, it is probable, become adapted without much
difficulty to the fresh waters of a distant land.

Some species of fresh-water shells have very wide ranges, and allied
species which, on our theory, are descended from a common parent, and
must have proceeded from a single source, prevail throughout the world.
Their distribution at first perplexed me much, as their ova are not
likely to be transported by birds; and the ova, as well as the adults,
are immediately killed by sea-water. I could not even understand
how some naturalised species have spread rapidly throughout the same
country. But two facts, which I have observed--and many others no
doubt will be discovered--throw some light on this subject. When ducks
suddenly emerge from a pond covered with duck-weed, I have twice seen
these little plants adhering to their backs; and it has happened to me,
in removing a little duck-weed from one aquarium to another, that I have
unintentionally stocked the one with fresh-water shells from the other.
But another agency is perhaps more effectual: I suspended the feet of a
duck in an aquarium, where many ova of fresh-water shells were hatching;
and I found that numbers of the extremely minute and just-hatched shells
crawled on the feet, and clung to them so firmly that when taken out
of the water they could not be jarred off, though at a somewhat more
advanced age they would voluntarily drop off. These just-hatched
molluscs, though aquatic in their nature, survived on the duck's feet,
in damp air, from twelve to twenty hours; and in this length of time
a duck or heron might fly at least six or seven hundred miles, and
if blown across the sea to an oceanic island, or to any other distant
point, would be sure to alight on a pool or rivulet. Sir Charles Lyell
informs me that a Dyticus has been caught with an Ancylus (a fresh-water
shell like a limpet) firmly adhering to it; and a water-beetle of
the same family, a Colymbetes, once flew on board the "Beagle," when
forty-five miles distant from the nearest land: how much farther it
might have been blown by a favouring gale no one can tell.

With respect to plants, it has long been known what enormous ranges many
fresh-water, and even marsh-species, have, both over continents and
to the most remote oceanic islands. This is strikingly illustrated,
according to Alph. de Candolle, in those large groups of terrestrial
plants, which have very few aquatic members; for the latter seem
immediately to acquire, as if in consequence, a wide range. I think
favourable means of dispersal explain this fact. I have before mentioned
that earth occasionally adheres in some quantity to the feet and beaks
of birds. Wading birds, which frequent the muddy edges of ponds, if
suddenly flushed, would be the most likely to have muddy feet. Birds
of this order wander more than those of any other; and are occasionally
found on the most remote and barren islands of the open ocean; they
would not be likely to alight on the surface of the sea, so that any
dirt on their feet would not be washed off; and when gaining the land,
they would be sure to fly to their natural fresh-water haunts. I do not
believe that botanists are aware how charged the mud of ponds is with
seeds: I have tried several little experiments, but will here give only
the most striking case: I took in February three tablespoonfuls of mud
from three different points, beneath water, on the edge of a little
pond; this mud when dry weighed only 6 and 3/4 ounces; I kept it covered
up in my study for six months, pulling up and counting each plant as it
grew; the plants were of many kinds, and were altogether 537 in number;
and yet the viscid mud was all contained in a breakfast cup! Considering
these facts, I think it would be an inexplicable circumstance if
water-birds did not transport the seeds of fresh-water plants to
unstocked ponds and streams, situated at very distant points. The same
agency may have come into play with the eggs of some of the smaller
fresh-water animals.

Other and unknown agencies probably have also played a part. I have
stated that fresh-water fish eat some kinds of seeds, though they reject
many other kinds after having swallowed them; even small fish swallow
seeds of moderate size, as of the yellow water-lily and Potamogeton.
Herons and other birds, century after century, have gone on daily
devouring fish; they then take flight and go to other waters, or are
blown across the sea; and we have seen that seeds retain their power of
germination, when rejected many hours afterwards in pellets or in
the excrement. When I saw the great size of the seeds of that fine
water-lily, the Nelumbium, and remembered Alph. de Candolle's remarks
on the distribution of this plant, I thought that the means of its
dispersal must remain inexplicable; but Audubon states that he found
the seeds of the great southern water-lily (probably according to Dr.
Hooker, the Nelumbium luteum) in a heron's stomach. Now this bird must
often have flown with its stomach thus well stocked to distant ponds,
and, then getting a hearty meal of fish, analogy makes me believe
that it would have rejected the seeds in the pellet in a fit state for
germination.

In considering these several means of distribution, it should be
remembered that when a pond or stream is first formed, for instance on a
rising islet, it will be unoccupied; and a single seed or egg will have
a good chance of succeeding. Although there will always be a struggle
for life between the inhabitants of the same pond, however few in kind,
yet as the number even in a well-stocked pond is small in comparison
with the number of species inhabiting an equal area of land, the
competition between them will probably be less severe than between
terrestrial species; consequently an intruder from the waters of a
foreign country would have a better chance of seizing on a new place,
than in the case of terrestrial colonists. We should also remember that
many fresh-water productions are low in the scale of nature, and we have
reason to believe that such beings become modified more slowly than the
high; and this will give time for the migration of aquatic species.
We should not forget the probability of many fresh-water forms having
formerly ranged continuously over immense areas, and then having become
extinct at intermediate points. But the wide distribution of fresh-water
plants, and of the lower animals, whether retaining the same identical
form, or in some degree modified, apparently depends in main part on the
wide dispersal of their seeds and eggs by animals, more especially by
fresh-water birds, which have great powers of flight, and naturally
travel from one piece of water to another.

ON THE INHABITANTS OF OCEANIC ISLANDS.

We now come to the last of the three classes of facts, which I have
selected as presenting the greatest amount of difficulty with respect to
distribution, on the view that not only all the individuals of the
same species have migrated from some one area, but that allied species,
although now inhabiting the most distant points, have proceeded from a
single area, the birthplace of their early progenitors. I have already
given my reasons for disbelieving in continental extensions within the
period of existing species on so enormous a scale that all the many
islands of the several oceans were thus stocked with their present
terrestrial inhabitants. This view removes many difficulties, but it
does not accord with all the facts in regard to the productions of
islands. In the following remarks I shall not confine myself to the mere
question of dispersal, but shall consider some other cases bearing on
the truth of the two theories of independent creation and of descent
with modification.

The species of all kinds which inhabit oceanic islands are few in number
compared with those on equal continental areas: Alph. de Candolle admits
this for plants, and Wollaston for insects. New Zealand, for instance,
with its lofty mountains and diversified stations, extending over 780
miles of latitude, together with the outlying islands of Auckland,
Campbell and Chatham, contain altogether only 960 kinds of flowering
plants; if we compare this moderate number with the species which swarm
over equal areas in Southwestern Australia or at the Cape of Good Hope,
we must admit that some cause, independently of different physical
conditions, has given rise to so great a difference in number. Even the
uniform county of Cambridge has 847 plants, and the little island of
Anglesea 764, but a few ferns and a few introduced plants are included
in these numbers, and the comparison in some other respects is not quite
fair. We have evidence that the barren island of Ascension aboriginally
possessed less than half-a-dozen flowering plants; yet many species have
now become naturalised on it, as they have in New Zealand and on every
other oceanic island which can be named. In St. Helena there is reason
to believe that the naturalised plants and animals have nearly or quite
exterminated many native productions. He who admits the doctrine of the
creation of each separate species, will have to admit that a sufficient
number of the best adapted plants and animals were not created for
oceanic islands; for man has unintentionally stocked them far more fully
and perfectly than did nature.

Although in oceanic islands the species are few in number, the
proportion of endemic kinds (i.e. those found nowhere else in the world)
is often extremely large. If we compare, for instance, the number of
endemic land-shells in Madeira, or of endemic birds in the Galapagos
Archipelago, with the number found on any continent, and then compare
the area of the island with that of the continent, we shall see that
this is true. This fact might have been theoretically expected, for, as
already explained, species occasionally arriving, after long intervals
of time in the new and isolated district, and having to compete with new
associates, would be eminently liable to modification, and would often
produce groups of modified descendants. But it by no means follows that,
because in an island nearly all the species of one class are peculiar,
those of another class, or of another section of the same class, are
peculiar; and this difference seems to depend partly on the species
which are not modified having immigrated in a body, so that their mutual
relations have not been much disturbed; and partly on the frequent
arrival of unmodified immigrants from the mother-country, with which
the insular forms have intercrossed. It should be borne in mind that the
offspring of such crosses would certainly gain in vigour; so that even
an occasional cross would produce more effect than might have been
anticipated. I will give a few illustrations of the foregoing remarks:
in the Galapagos Islands there are twenty-six land birds; of these
twenty-one (or perhaps twenty-three) are peculiar; whereas of the eleven
marine birds only two are peculiar; and it is obvious that marine birds
could arrive at these islands much more easily and frequently than
land-birds. Bermuda, on the other hand, which lies at about the same
distance from North America as the Galapagos Islands do from South
America, and which has a very peculiar soil, does not possess a single
endemic land bird; and we know from Mr. J.M. Jones's admirable account
of Bermuda, that very many North American birds occasionally or even
frequently visit this island. Almost every year, as I am informed by
Mr. E.V. Harcourt, many European and African birds are blown to Madeira;
this island is inhabited by ninety-nine kinds, of which one alone is
peculiar, though very closely related to a European form; and three or
four other species are confined to this island and to the Canaries.
So that the islands of Bermuda and Madeira have been stocked from the
neighbouring continents with birds, which for long ages have there
struggled together, and have become mutually co-adapted. Hence, when
settled in their new homes, each kind will have been kept by the others
to its proper place and habits, and will consequently have been but
little liable to modification. Any tendency to modification will also
have been checked by intercrossing with the unmodified immigrants,
often arriving from the mother-country. Madeira again is inhabited by
a wonderful number of peculiar land-shells, whereas not one species
of sea-shell is peculiar to its shores: now, though we do not know how
sea-shells are dispersed, yet we can see that their eggs or larvae,
perhaps attached to seaweed or floating timber, or to the feet of wading
birds, might be transported across three or four hundred miles of open
sea far more easily than land-shells. The different orders of insects
inhabiting Madeira present nearly parallel cases.

Oceanic islands are sometimes deficient in animals of certain whole
classes, and their places are occupied by other classes; thus in the
Galapagos Islands reptiles, and in New Zealand gigantic wingless birds,
take, or recently took, the place of mammals. Although New Zealand
is here spoken of as an oceanic island, it is in some degree doubtful
whether it should be so ranked; it is of large size, and is not
separated from Australia by a profoundly deep sea; from its geological
character and the direction of its mountain ranges, the Rev. W.B. Clarke
has lately maintained that this island, as well as New Caledonia, should
be considered as appurtenances of Australia. Turning to plants, Dr.
Hooker has shown that in the Galapagos Islands the proportional numbers
of the different orders are very different from what they are elsewhere.
All such differences in number, and the absence of certain whole
groups of animals and plants, are generally accounted for by supposed
differences in the physical conditions of the islands; but this
explanation is not a little doubtful. Facility of immigration seems to
have been fully as important as the nature of the conditions.

Many remarkable little facts could be given with respect to the
inhabitants of oceanic islands. For instance, in certain islands not
tenanted by a single mammal, some of the endemic plants have beautifully
hooked seeds; yet few relations are more manifest than that hooks serve
for the transportal of seeds in the wool or fur of quadrupeds. But a
hooked seed might be carried to an island by other means; and the plant
then becoming modified would form an endemic species, still retaining
its hooks, which would form a useless appendage, like the shrivelled
wings under the soldered wing-covers of many insular beetles. Again,
islands often possess trees or bushes belonging to orders which
elsewhere include only herbaceous species; now trees, as Alph. de
Candolle has shown, generally have, whatever the cause may be, confined
ranges. Hence trees would be little likely to reach distant oceanic
islands; and an herbaceous plant, which had no chance of successfully
competing with the many fully developed trees growing on a continent,
might, when established on an island, gain an advantage over other
herbaceous plants by growing taller and taller and overtopping them.
In this case, natural selection would tend to add to the stature of the
plant, to whatever order it belonged, and thus first convert it into a
bush and then into a tree.

ABSENCE OF BATRACHIANS AND TERRESTRIAL MAMMALS ON OCEANIC ISLANDS.

With respect to the absence of whole orders of animals on oceanic
islands, Bory St. Vincent long ago remarked that Batrachians (frogs,
toads, newts) are never found on any of the many islands with which the
great oceans are studded. I have taken pains to verify this assertion,
and have found it true, with the exception of New Zealand, New
Caledonia, the Andaman Islands, and perhaps the Solomon Islands and the
Seychelles. But I have already remarked that it is doubtful whether New
Zealand and New Caledonia ought to be classed as oceanic islands; and
this is still more doubtful with respect to the Andaman and Solomon
groups and the Seychelles. This general absence of frogs, toads and
newts on so many true oceanic islands cannot be accounted for by their
physical conditions; indeed it seems that islands are peculiarly fitted
for these animals; for frogs have been introduced into Madeira, the
Azores, and Mauritius, and have multiplied so as to become a nuisance.
But as these animals and their spawn are immediately killed (with the
exception, as far as known, of one Indian species) by sea-water, there
would be great difficulty in their transportal across the sea, and
therefore we can see why they do not exist on strictly oceanic islands.
But why, on the theory of creation, they should not have been created
there, it would be very difficult to explain.

Mammals offer another and similar case. I have carefully searched the
oldest voyages, and have not found a single instance, free from doubt,
of a terrestrial mammal (excluding domesticated animals kept by the
natives) inhabiting an island situated above 300 miles from a continent
or great continental island; and many islands situated at a much less
distance are equally barren. The Falkland Islands, which are inhabited
by a wolf-like fox, come nearest to an exception; but this group cannot
be considered as oceanic, as it lies on a bank in connection with the
mainland at a distance of about 280 miles; moreover, icebergs formerly
brought boulders to its western shores, and they may have formerly
transported foxes, as now frequently happens in the arctic regions. Yet
it cannot be said that small islands will not support at least small
mammals, for they occur in many parts of the world on very small
islands, when lying close to a continent; and hardly an island can be
named on which our smaller quadrupeds have not become naturalised and
greatly multiplied. It cannot be said, on the ordinary view of creation,
that there has not been time for the creation of mammals; many volcanic
islands are sufficiently ancient, as shown by the stupendous degradation
which they have suffered, and by their tertiary strata: there has also
been time for the production of endemic species belonging to other
classes; and on continents it is known that new species of mammals
appear and disappear at a quicker rate than other and lower animals.
Although terrestrial mammals do not occur on oceanic islands, aerial
mammals do occur on almost every island. New Zealand possesses two bats
found nowhere else in the world: Norfolk Island, the Viti Archipelago,
the Bonin Islands, the Caroline and Marianne Archipelagoes, and
Mauritius, all possess their peculiar bats. Why, it may be asked, has
the supposed creative force produced bats and no other mammals on
remote islands? On my view this question can easily be answered; for no
terrestrial mammal can be transported across a wide space of sea, but
bats can fly across. Bats have been seen wandering by day far over the
Atlantic Ocean; and two North American species, either regularly or
occasionally, visit Bermuda, at the distance of 600 miles from the
mainland. I hear from Mr. Tomes, who has specially studied this family,
that many species have enormous ranges, and are found on continents
and on far distant islands. Hence, we have only to suppose that such
wandering species have been modified in their new homes in relation to
their new position, and we can understand the presence of endemic bats
on oceanic islands, with the absence of all other terrestrial mammals.

Another interesting relation exists, namely, between the depth of the
sea separating islands from each other, or from the nearest continent,
and the degree of affinity of their mammalian inhabitants. Mr. Windsor
Earl has made some striking observations on this head, since greatly
extended by Mr. Wallace's admirable researches, in regard to the great
Malay Archipelago, which is traversed near Celebes by a space of deep
ocean, and this separates two widely distinct mammalian faunas. On
either side, the islands stand on a moderately shallow submarine
bank, and these islands are inhabited by the same or by closely allied
quadrupeds. I have not as yet had time to follow up this subject in all
quarters of the world; but as far as I have gone, the relation holds
good. For instance, Britain is separated by a shallow channel from
Europe, and the mammals are the same on both sides; and so it is with
all the islands near the shores of Australia. The West Indian Islands,
on the other hand, stand on a deeply submerged bank, nearly one thousand
fathoms in depth, and here we find American forms, but the species and
even the genera are quite distinct. As the amount of modification which
animals of all kinds undergo partly depends on the lapse of time, and as
the islands which are separated from each other, or from the mainland,
by shallow channels, are more likely to have been continuously united
within a recent period than the islands separated by deeper channels, we
can understand how it is that a relation exists between the depth of the
sea separating two mammalian faunas, and the degree of their affinity,
a relation which is quite inexplicable on the theory of independent acts
of creation.

The foregoing statements in regard to the inhabitants of oceanic
islands, namely, the fewness of the species, with a large proportion
consisting of endemic forms--the members of certain groups, but not
those of other groups in the same class, having been modified--the
absence of certain whole orders, as of batrachians and of terrestrial
mammals, notwithstanding the presence of aerial bats, the singular
proportions of certain orders of plants, herbaceous forms having been
developed into trees, etc., seem to me to accord better with the belief
in the efficiency of occasional means of transport, carried on during
a long course of time, than with the belief in the former connection of
all oceanic islands with the nearest continent; for on this latter
view it is probable that the various classes would have immigrated more
uniformly, and from the species having entered in a body, their mutual
relations would not have been much disturbed, and consequently, they
would either have not been modified, or all the species in a more
equable manner.

I do not deny that there are many and serious difficulties in
understanding how many of the inhabitants of the more remote islands,
whether still retaining the same specific form or subsequently modified,
have reached their present homes. But the probability of other islands
having once existed as halting-places, of which not a wreck now remains,
must not be overlooked. I will specify one difficult case. Almost all
oceanic islands, even the most isolated and smallest, are inhabited
by land-shells, generally by endemic species, but sometimes by species
found elsewhere striking instances of which have been given by Dr. A.A.
Gould in relation to the Pacific. Now it is notorious that land-shells
are easily killed by sea-water; their eggs, at least such as I have
tried, sink in it and are killed. Yet there must be some unknown,
but occasionally efficient means for their transportal. Would the
just-hatched young sometimes adhere to the feet of birds roosting on
the ground and thus get transported? It occurred to me that land-shells,
when hybernating and having a membranous diaphragm over the mouth of the
shell, might be floated in chinks of drifted timber across moderately
wide arms of the sea. And I find that several species in this state
withstand uninjured an immersion in sea-water during seven days. One
shell, the Helix pomatia, after having been thus treated, and again
hybernating, was put into sea-water for twenty days and perfectly
recovered. During this length of time the shell might have been
carried by a marine country of average swiftness to a distance of 660
geographical miles. As this Helix has a thick calcareous operculum
I removed it, and when it had formed a new membranous one, I again
immersed it for fourteen days in sea-water, and again it recovered and
crawled away. Baron Aucapitaine has since tried similar experiments. He
placed 100 land-shells, belonging to ten species, in a box pierced with
holes, and immersed it for a fortnight in the sea. Out of the hundred
shells twenty-seven recovered. The presence of an operculum seems
to have been of importance, as out of twelve specimens of Cyclostoma
elegans, which is thus furnished, eleven revived. It is remarkable,
seeing how well the Helix pomatia resisted with me the salt-water, that
not one of fifty-four specimens belonging to four other species of Helix
tried by Aucapitaine recovered. It is, however, not at all probable that
land-shells have often been thus transported; the feet of birds offer a
more probable method.

ON THE RELATIONS OF THE INHABITANTS OF ISLANDS TO THOSE OF THE NEAREST
MAINLAND.

The most striking and important fact for us is the affinity of the
species which inhabit islands to those of the nearest mainland,
without being actually the same. Numerous instances could be given. The
Galapagos Archipelago, situated under the equator, lies at a distance of
between 500 and 600 miles from the shores of South America. Here almost
every product of the land and of the water bears the unmistakable stamp
of the American continent. There are twenty-six land birds. Of these
twenty-one, or perhaps twenty-three, are ranked as distinct species,
and would commonly be assumed to have been here created; yet the close
affinity of most of these birds to American species is manifest in every
character in their habits, gestures, and tones of voice. So it is with
the other animals, and with a large proportion of the plants, as
shown by Dr. Hooker in his admirable Flora of this archipelago. The
naturalist, looking at the inhabitants of these volcanic islands in the
Pacific, distant several hundred miles from the continent, feels that
he is standing on American land. Why should this be so? Why should
the species which are supposed to have been created in the Galapagos
Archipelago, and nowhere else, bear so plainly the stamp of affinity to
those created in America? There is nothing in the conditions of life, in
the geological nature of the islands, in their height or climate, or in
the proportions in which the several classes are associated together,
which closely resembles the conditions of the South American coast. In
fact, there is a considerable dissimilarity in all these respects. On
the other hand, there is a considerable degree of resemblance in the
volcanic nature of the soil, in the climate, height, and size of the
islands, between the Galapagos and Cape Verde Archipelagos: but what an
entire and absolute difference in their inhabitants! The inhabitants of
the Cape Verde Islands are related to those of Africa, like those of
the Galapagos to America. Facts, such as these, admit of no sort of
explanation on the ordinary view of independent creation; whereas, on
the view here maintained, it is obvious that the Galapagos Islands would
be likely to receive colonists from America, whether by occasional means
of transport or (though I do not believe in this doctrine) by formerly
continuous land, and the Cape Verde Islands from Africa; such colonists
would be liable to modification--the principle of inheritance still
betraying their original birthplace.

Many analogous facts could be given: indeed it is an almost universal
rule that the endemic productions of islands are related to those of the
nearest continent, or of the nearest large island. The exceptions are
few, and most of them can be explained. Thus, although Kerguelen Land
stands nearer to Africa than to America, the plants are related, and
that very closely, as we know from Dr. Hooker's account, to those of
America: but on the view that this island has been mainly stocked
by seeds brought with earth and stones on icebergs, drifted by the
prevailing currents, this anomaly disappears. New Zealand in its endemic
plants is much more closely related to Australia, the nearest mainland,
than to any other region: and this is what might have been expected; but
it is also plainly related to South America, which, although the next
nearest continent, is so enormously remote, that the fact becomes an
anomaly. But this difficulty partially disappears on the view that New
Zealand, South America, and the other southern lands, have been stocked
in part from a nearly intermediate though distant point, namely, from
the antarctic islands, when they were clothed with vegetation, during
a warmer tertiary period, before the commencement of the last Glacial
period. The affinity, which, though feeble, I am assured by Dr. Hooker
is real, between the flora of the south-western corner of Australia
and of the Cape of Good Hope, is a far more remarkable case; but this
affinity is confined to the plants, and will, no doubt, some day be
explained.

The same law which has determined the relationship between the
inhabitants of islands and the nearest mainland, is sometimes displayed
on a small scale, but in a most interesting manner, within the limits
of the same archipelago. Thus each separate island of the Galapagos
Archipelago is tenanted, and the fact is a marvellous one, by many
distinct species; but these species are related to each other in a very
much closer manner than to the inhabitants of the American continent,
or of any other quarter of the world. This is what might have been
expected, for islands situated so near to each other would almost
necessarily receive immigrants from the same original source, and
from each other. But how is it that many of the immigrants have been
differently modified, though only in a small degree, in islands situated
within sight of each other, having the same geological nature, the same
height, climate, etc? This long appeared to me a great difficulty: but
it arises in chief part from the deeply-seated error of considering
the physical conditions of a country as the most important; whereas it
cannot be disputed that the nature of the other species with which
each has to compete, is at least as important, and generally a far
more important element of success. Now if we look to the species which
inhabit the Galapagos Archipelago, and are likewise found in other
parts of the world, we find that they differ considerably in the several
islands. This difference might indeed have been expected if the
islands have been stocked by occasional means of transport--a seed, for
instance, of one plant having been brought to one island, and that of
another plant to another island, though all proceeding from the same
general source. Hence, when in former times an immigrant first settled
on one of the islands, or when it subsequently spread from one to
another, it would undoubtedly be exposed to different conditions in the
different islands, for it would have to compete with a different set of
organisms; a plant, for instance, would find the ground best-fitted for
it occupied by somewhat different species in the different islands, and
would be exposed to the attacks of somewhat different enemies. If, then,
it varied, natural selection would probably favour different varieties
in the different islands. Some species, however, might spread and yet
retain the same character throughout the group, just as we see some
species spreading widely throughout a continent and remaining the same.

The really surprising fact in this case of the Galapagos Archipelago,
and in a lesser degree in some analogous cases, is that each new species
after being formed in any one island, did not spread quickly to the
other islands. But the islands, though in sight of each other, are
separated by deep arms of the sea, in most cases wider than the British
Channel, and there is no reason to suppose that they have at any former
period been continuously united. The currents of the sea are rapid and
deep between the islands, and gales of wind are extraordinarily rare; so
that the islands are far more effectually separated from each other than
they appear on a map. Nevertheless, some of the species, both of
those found in other parts of the world and of those confined to the
archipelago, are common to the several islands; and we may infer from
the present manner of distribution that they have spread from one island
to the others. But we often take, I think, an erroneous view of the
probability of closely allied species invading each other's territory,
when put into free intercommunication. Undoubtedly, if one species has
any advantage over another, it will in a very brief time wholly or in
part supplant it; but if both are equally well fitted for their own
places, both will probably hold their separate places for almost
any length of time. Being familiar with the fact that many species,
naturalised through man's agency, have spread with astonishing rapidity
over wide areas, we are apt to infer that most species would thus
spread; but we should remember that the species which become naturalised
in new countries are not generally closely allied to the aboriginal
inhabitants, but are very distinct forms, belonging in a large
proportion of cases, as shown by Alph. de Candolle, to distinct genera.
In the Galapagos Archipelago, many even of the birds, though so well
adapted for flying from island to island, differ on the different
islands; thus there are three closely allied species of mocking-thrush,
each confined to its own island. Now let us suppose the mocking-thrush
of Chatham Island to be blown to Charles Island, which has its own
mocking-thrush; why should it succeed in establishing itself there?
We may safely infer that Charles Island is well stocked with its own
species, for annually more eggs are laid and young birds hatched
than can possibly be reared; and we may infer that the mocking-thrush
peculiar to Charles Island is at least as well fitted for its home as is
the species peculiar to Chatham Island. Sir C. Lyell and Mr. Wollaston
have communicated to me a remarkable fact bearing on this subject;
namely, that Madeira and the adjoining islet of Porto Santo possess many
distinct but representative species of land-shells, some of which
live in crevices of stone; and although large quantities of stone are
annually transported from Porto Santo to Madeira, yet this latter island
has not become colonised by the Porto Santo species: nevertheless, both
islands have been colonised by some European land-shells, which no
doubt had some advantage over the indigenous species. From these
considerations I think we need not greatly marvel at the endemic species
which inhabit the several islands of the Galapagos Archipelago not
having all spread from island to island. On the same continent, also,
pre-occupation has probably played an important part in checking the
commingling of the species which inhabit different districts with
nearly the same physical conditions. Thus, the south-east and south-west
corners of Australia have nearly the same physical conditions, and are
united by continuous land, yet they are inhabited by a vast number of
distinct mammals, birds, and plants; so it is, according to Mr. Bates,
with the butterflies and other animals inhabiting the great, open, and
continuous valley of the Amazons.

The same principle which governs the general character of the
inhabitants of oceanic islands, namely, the relation to the source
whence colonists could have been most easily derived, together with
their subsequent modification, is of the widest application throughout
nature. We see this on every mountain-summit, in every lake and marsh.
For Alpine species, excepting in as far as the same species have become
widely spread during the Glacial epoch, are related to those of
the surrounding lowlands; thus we have in South America, Alpine
humming-birds, Alpine rodents, Alpine plants, etc., all strictly
belonging to American forms; and it is obvious that a mountain, as
it became slowly upheaved, would be colonised from the surrounding
lowlands. So it is with the inhabitants of lakes and marshes, excepting
in so far as great facility of transport has allowed the same forms
to prevail throughout large portions of the world. We see the same
principle in the character of most of the blind animals inhabiting the
caves of America and of Europe. Other analogous facts could be given.
It will, I believe, be found universally true, that wherever in
two regions, let them be ever so distant, many closely allied or
representative species occur, there will likewise be found some
identical species; and wherever many closely-allied species occur,
there will be found many forms which some naturalists rank as distinct
species, and others as mere varieties; these doubtful forms showing us
the steps in the process of modification.

The relation between the power and extent of migration in certain
species, either at the present or at some former period, and the
existence at remote points of the world of closely allied species, is
shown in another and more general way. Mr. Gould remarked to me long
ago, that in those genera of birds which range over the world, many of
the species have very wide ranges. I can hardly doubt that this rule
is generally true, though difficult of proof. Among mammals, we see it
strikingly displayed in Bats, and in a lesser degree in the Felidae and
Canidae. We see the same rule in the distribution of butterflies and
beetles. So it is with most of the inhabitants of fresh water, for many
of the genera in the most distinct classes range over the world, and
many of the species have enormous ranges. It is not meant that all, but
that some of the species have very wide ranges in the genera which range
very widely. Nor is it meant that the species in such genera have, on an
average, a very wide range; for this will largely depend on how far the
process of modification has gone; for instance, two varieties of the
same species inhabit America and Europe, and thus the species has an
immense range; but, if variation were to be carried a little further,
the two varieties would be ranked as distinct species, and their range
would be greatly reduced. Still less is it meant, that species which
have the capacity of crossing barriers and ranging widely, as in the
case of certain powerfully-winged birds, will necessarily range widely;
for we should never forget that to range widely implies not only the
power of crossing barriers, but the more important power of being
victorious in distant lands in the struggle for life with foreign
associates. But according to the view that all the species of a genus,
though distributed to the most remote points of the world, are descended
from a single progenitor, we ought to find, and I believe as a general
rule we do find, that some at least of the species range very widely.

We should bear in mind that many genera in all classes are of ancient
origin, and the species in this case will have had ample time for
dispersal and subsequent modification. There is also reason to believe,
from geological evidence, that within each great class the lower
organisms change at a slower rate than the higher; consequently they
will have had a better chance of ranging widely and of still retaining
the same specific character. This fact, together with that of the seeds
and eggs of most lowly organised forms being very minute and better
fitted for distant transportal, probably accounts for a law which has
long been observed, and which has lately been discussed by Alph. de
Candolle in regard to plants, namely, that the lower any group of
organisms stands the more widely it ranges.

The relations just discussed--namely, lower organisms ranging more
widely than the higher--some of the species of widely-ranging genera
themselves ranging widely--such facts, as alpine, lacustrine, and
marsh productions being generally related to those which live on the
surrounding low lands and dry lands--the striking relationship between
the inhabitants of islands and those of the nearest mainland--the still
closer relationship of the distinct inhabitants of the islands of
the same archipelago--are inexplicable on the ordinary view of the
independent creation of each species, but are explicable if we admit
colonisation from the nearest or readiest source, together with the
subsequent adaptation of the colonists to their new homes.

SUMMARY OF THE LAST AND PRESENT CHAPTERS.

In these chapters I have endeavoured to show that if we make due
allowance for our ignorance of the full effects of changes of climate
and of the level of the land, which have certainly occurred within the
recent period, and of other changes which have probably occurred--if we
remember how ignorant we are with respect to the many curious means of
occasional transport--if we bear in mind, and this is a very important
consideration, how often a species may have ranged continuously over a
wide area, and then have become extinct in the intermediate tracts--the
difficulty is not insuperable in believing that all the individuals of
the same species, wherever found, are descended from common parents.
And we are led to this conclusion, which has been arrived at by many
naturalists under the designation of single centres of creation, by
various general considerations, more especially from the importance
of barriers of all kinds, and from the analogical distribution of
subgenera, genera, and families.

With respect to distinct species belonging to the same genus, which
on our theory have spread from one parent-source; if we make the same
allowances as before for our ignorance, and remember that some forms of
life have changed very slowly, enormous periods of time having been thus
granted for their migration, the difficulties are far from insuperable;
though in this case, as in that of the individuals of the same species,
they are often great.

As exemplifying the effects of climatical changes on distribution, I
have attempted to show how important a part the last Glacial period has
played, which affected even the equatorial regions, and which, during
the alternations of the cold in the north and the south, allowed the
productions of opposite hemispheres to mingle, and left some of them
stranded on the mountain-summits in all parts of the world. As showing
how diversified are the means of occasional transport, I have discussed
at some little length the means of dispersal of fresh-water productions.

If the difficulties be not insuperable in admitting that in the long
course of time all the individuals of the same species, and likewise
of the several species belonging to the same genus, have proceeded
from some one source; then all the grand leading facts of geographical
distribution are explicable on the theory of migration, together with
subsequent modification and the multiplication of new forms. We can thus
understand the high importance of barriers, whether of land or water, in
not only separating but in apparently forming the several zoological and
botanical provinces. We can thus understand the concentration of related
species within the same areas; and how it is that under different
latitudes, for instance, in South America, the inhabitants of the plains
and mountains, of the forests, marshes, and deserts, are linked together
in so mysterious a manner, and are likewise linked to the extinct beings
which formerly inhabited the same continent. Bearing in mind that the
mutual relation of organism to organism is of the highest importance,
we can see why two areas, having nearly the same physical conditions,
should often be inhabited by very different forms of life; for according
to the length of time which has elapsed since the colonists entered one
of the regions, or both; according to the nature of the communication
which allowed certain forms and not others to enter, either in greater
or lesser numbers; according or not as those which entered happened to
come into more or less direct competition with each other and with the
aborigines; and according as the immigrants were capable of varying
more or less rapidly, there would ensue in the to or more regions,
independently of their physical conditions, infinitely diversified
conditions of life; there would be an almost endless amount of organic
action and reaction, and we should find some groups of beings greatly,
and some only slightly modified; some developed in great force, some
existing in scanty numbers--and this we do find in the several great
geographical provinces of the world.

On these same principles we can understand, as I have endeavoured to
show, why oceanic islands should have few inhabitants, but that of
these, a large proportion should be endemic or peculiar; and why, in
relation to the means of migration, one group of beings should have all
its species peculiar, and another group, even within the same class,
should have all its species the same with those in an adjoining quarter
of the world. We can see why whole groups of organisms, as batrachians
and terrestrial mammals, should be absent from oceanic islands, whilst
the most isolated islands should possess their own peculiar species of
aerial mammals or bats. We can see why, in islands, there should be some
relation between the presence of mammals, in a more or less modified
condition, and the depth of the sea between such islands and the
mainland. We can clearly see why all the inhabitants of an archipelago,
though specifically distinct on the several islets, should be closely
related to each other, and should likewise be related, but less closely,
to those of the nearest continent, or other source whence immigrants
might have been derived. We can see why, if there exist very closely
allied or representative species in two areas, however distant from each
other, some identical species will almost always there be found.

As the late Edward Forbes often insisted, there is a striking
parallelism in the laws of life throughout time and space; the laws
governing the succession of forms in past times being nearly the same
with those governing at the present time the differences in different
areas. We see this in many facts. The endurance of each species and
group of species is continuous in time; for the apparent exceptions to
the rule are so few that they may fairly be attributed to our not having
as yet discovered in an intermediate deposit certain forms which are
absent in it, but which occur above and below: so in space, it certainly
is the general rule that the area inhabited by a single species, or by a
group of species, is continuous, and the exceptions, which are not rare,
may, as I have attempted to show, be accounted for by former migrations
under different circumstances, or through occasional means of transport,
or by the species having become extinct in the intermediate tracts. Both
in time and space species and groups of species have their points of
maximum development. Groups of species, living during the same period
of time, or living within the same area, are often characterised by
trifling features in common, as of sculpture or colour. In looking to
the long succession of past ages, as in looking to distant provinces
throughout the world, we find that species in certain classes differ
little from each other, whilst those in another class, or only in a
different section of the same order, differ greatly from each other. In
both time and space the lowly organised members of each class generally
change less than the highly organised; but there are in both cases
marked exceptions to the rule. According to our theory, these several
relations throughout time and space are intelligible; for whether we
look to the allied forms of life which have changed during successive
ages, or to those which have changed after having migrated into distant
quarters, in both cases they are connected by the same bond of ordinary
generation; in both cases the laws of variation have been the same,
and modifications have been accumulated by the same means of natural
selection.




CHAPTER XIV. MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS:

MORPHOLOGY--EMBRYOLOGY--RUDIMENTARY ORGANS.

 Classification, groups subordinate to groups--Natural system--Rules and
 difficulties in classification, explained on the theory of descent
 with modification--Classification of varieties--Descent always used in
 classification--Analogical or adaptive characters--Affinities,
 general, complex and radiating--Extinction separates and defines
 groups--Morphology, between members of the same class, between parts of
 the same individual--Embryology, laws of, explained by variations not
 supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding
 age--Rudimentary organs; their origin explained--Summary.


CLASSIFICATION.

From the most remote period in the history of the world organic beings
have been found to resemble each other in descending degrees, so that
they can be classed in groups under groups. This classification is
not arbitrary like the grouping of the stars in constellations. The
existence of groups would have been of simple significance, if one group
had been exclusively fitted to inhabit the land, and another the water;
one to feed on flesh, another on vegetable matter, and so on; but the
case is widely different, for it is notorious how commonly members of
even the same subgroup have different habits. In the second and fourth
chapters, on Variation and on Natural Selection, I have attempted
to show that within each country it is the widely ranging, the much
diffused and common, that is the dominant species, belonging to
the larger genera in each class, which vary most. The varieties, or
incipient species, thus produced, ultimately become converted into new
and distinct species; and these, on the principle of inheritance, tend
to produce other new and dominant species. Consequently the groups which
are now large, and which generally include many dominant species, tend
to go on increasing in size. I further attempted to show that from the
varying descendants of each species trying to occupy as many and as
different places as possible in the economy of nature, they constantly
tend to diverge in character. This latter conclusion is supported by
observing the great diversity of forms, which, in any small area, come
into the closest competition, and by certain facts in naturalisation.

I attempted also to show that there is a steady tendency in the forms
which are increasing in number and diverging in character, to supplant
and exterminate the preceding, less divergent and less improved forms.
I request the reader to turn to the diagram illustrating the action, as
formerly explained, of these several principles; and he will see that
the inevitable result is, that the modified descendants proceeding from
one progenitor become broken up into groups subordinate to groups. In
the diagram each letter on the uppermost line may represent a genus
including several species; and the whole of the genera along this upper
line form together one class, for all are descended from one ancient
parent, and, consequently, have inherited something in common. But the
three genera on the left hand have, on this same principle, much in
common, and form a subfamily, distinct from that containing the next
two genera on the right hand, which diverged from a common parent at
the fifth stage of descent. These five genera have also much in common,
though less than when grouped in subfamilies; and they form a family
distinct from that containing the three genera still further to the
right hand, which diverged at an earlier period. And all these genera,
descended from (A), form an order distinct from the genera descended
from (I). So that we here have many species descended from a single
progenitor grouped into genera; and the genera into subfamilies,
families and orders, all under one great class. The grand fact of the
natural subordination of organic beings in groups under groups, which,
from its familiarity, does not always sufficiently strike us, is in
my judgment thus explained. No doubt organic beings, like all other
objects, can be classed in many ways, either artificially by single
characters, or more naturally by a number of characters. We know,
for instance, that minerals and the elemental substances can be thus
arranged. In this case there is of course no relation to genealogical
succession, and no cause can at present be assigned for their falling
into groups. But with organic beings the case is different, and the view
above given accords with their natural arrangement in group under group;
and no other explanation has ever been attempted.

Naturalists, as we have seen, try to arrange the species, genera and
families in each class, on what is called the Natural System. But what
is meant by this system? Some authors look at it merely as a scheme for
arranging together those living objects which are most alike, and for
separating those which are most unlike; or as an artificial method of
enunciating, as briefly as possible, general propositions--that is,
by one sentence to give the characters common, for instance, to all
mammals, by another those common to all carnivora, by another those
common to the dog-genus, and then, by adding a single sentence, a full
description is given of each kind of dog. The ingenuity and utility of
this system are indisputable. But many naturalists think that something
more is meant by the Natural System; they believe that it reveals the
plan of the Creator; but unless it be specified whether order in time
or space, or both, or what else is meant by the plan of the Creator,
it seems to me that nothing is thus added to our knowledge. Expressions
such as that famous one by Linnaeus, which we often meet with in a more
or less concealed form, namely, that the characters do not make the
genus, but that the genus gives the characters, seem to imply that some
deeper bond is included in our classifications than mere resemblance.
I believe that this is the case, and that community of descent--the one
known cause of close similarity in organic beings--is the bond, which,
though observed by various degrees of modification, is partially
revealed to us by our classifications.

Let us now consider the rules followed in classification, and the
difficulties which are encountered on the view that classification
either gives some unknown plan of creation, or is simply a scheme for
enunciating general propositions and of placing together the forms most
like each other. It might have been thought (and was in ancient times
thought) that those parts of the structure which determined the habits
of life, and the general place of each being in the economy of nature,
would be of very high importance in classification. Nothing can be more
false. No one regards the external similarity of a mouse to a shrew, of
a dugong to a whale, of a whale to a fish, as of any importance. These
resemblances, though so intimately connected with the whole life of the
being, are ranked as merely "adaptive or analogical characters;" but to
the consideration of these resemblances we shall recur. It may even be
given as a general rule, that the less any part of the organisation
is concerned with special habits, the more important it becomes for
classification. As an instance: Owen, in speaking of the dugong, says,
"The generative organs, being those which are most remotely related to
the habits and food of an animal, I have always regarded as affording
very clear indications of its true affinities. We are least likely in
the modifications of these organs to mistake a merely adaptive for an
essential character." With plants how remarkable it is that the organs
of vegetation, on which their nutrition and life depend, are of little
signification; whereas the organs of reproduction, with their product
the seed and embryo, are of paramount importance! So again, in formerly
discussing certain morphological characters which are not functionally
important, we have seen that they are often of the highest service in
classification. This depends on their constancy throughout many allied
groups; and their constancy chiefly depends on any slight deviations not
having been preserved and accumulated by natural selection, which acts
only on serviceable characters.

That the mere physiological importance of an organ does not determine
its classificatory value, is almost proved by the fact, that in allied
groups, in which the same organ, as we have every reason to suppose, has
nearly the same physiological value, its classificatory value is widely
different. No naturalist can have worked at any group without being
struck with this fact; and it has been fully acknowledged in the
writings of almost every author. It will suffice to quote the highest
authority, Robert Brown, who, in speaking of certain organs in the
Proteaceae, says their generic importance, "like that of all their
parts, not only in this, but, as I apprehend in every natural family,
is very unequal, and in some cases seems to be entirely lost." Again,
in another work he says, the genera of the Connaraceae "differ in having
one or more ovaria, in the existence or absence of albumen, in the
imbricate or valvular aestivation. Any one of these characters singly is
frequently of more than generic importance, though here even, when
all taken together, they appear insufficient to separate Cnestis from
Connarus." To give an example among insects: in one great division
of the Hymenoptera, the antennae, as Westwood has remarked, are most
constant in structure; in another division they differ much, and the
differences are of quite subordinate value in classification; yet no one
will say that the antennae in these two divisions of the same order are
of unequal physiological importance. Any number of instances could be
given of the varying importance for classification of the same important
organ within the same group of beings.

Again, no one will say that rudimentary or atrophied organs are of high
physiological or vital importance; yet, undoubtedly, organs in this
condition are often of much value in classification. No one will dispute
that the rudimentary teeth in the upper jaws of young ruminants,
and certain rudimentary bones of the leg, are highly serviceable in
exhibiting the close affinity between Ruminants and Pachyderms. Robert
Brown has strongly insisted on the fact that the position of the
rudimentary florets is of the highest importance in the classification
of the Grasses.

Numerous instances could be given of characters derived from parts which
must be considered of very trifling physiological importance, but which
are universally admitted as highly serviceable in the definition of
whole groups. For instance, whether or not there is an open passage from
the nostrils to the mouth, the only character, according to Owen, which
absolutely distinguishes fishes and reptiles--the inflection of the
angle of the lower jaw in Marsupials--the manner in which the wings of
insects are folded--mere colour in certain Algae--mere pubescence on
parts of the flower in grasses--the nature of the dermal covering, as
hair or feathers, in the Vertebrata. If the Ornithorhynchus had been
covered with feathers instead of hair, this external and trifling
character would have been considered by naturalists as an important aid
in determining the degree of affinity of this strange creature to birds.

The importance, for classification, of trifling characters, mainly
depends on their being correlated with many other characters of more or
less importance. The value indeed of an aggregate of characters is very
evident in natural history. Hence, as has often been remarked, a
species may depart from its allies in several characters, both of high
physiological importance, and of almost universal prevalence, and yet
leave us in no doubt where it should be ranked. Hence, also, it has been
found that a classification founded on any single character,
however important that may be, has always failed; for no part of the
organisation is invariably constant. The importance of an aggregate of
characters, even when none are important, alone explains the aphorism
enunciated by Linnaeus, namely, that the characters do not give the
genus, but the genus gives the character; for this seems founded on the
appreciation of many trifling points of resemblance, too slight to be
defined. Certain plants, belonging to the Malpighiaceae, bear perfect
and degraded flowers; in the latter, as A. de Jussieu has remarked, "The
greater number of the characters proper to the species, to the genus,
to the family, to the class, disappear, and thus laugh at our
classification." When Aspicarpa produced in France, during several
years, only these degraded flowers, departing so wonderfully in a number
of the most important points of structure from the proper type of the
order, yet M. Richard sagaciously saw, as Jussieu observes, that this
genus should still be retained among the Malpighiaceae. This case well
illustrates the spirit of our classifications.

Practically, when naturalists are at work, they do not trouble
themselves about the physiological value of the characters which they
use in defining a group or in allocating any particular species. If they
find a character nearly uniform, and common to a great number of forms,
and not common to others, they use it as one of high value; if common to
some lesser number, they use it as of subordinate value. This principle
has been broadly confessed by some naturalists to be the true one; and
by none more clearly than by that excellent botanist, Aug. St. Hilaire.
If several trifling characters are always found in combination, though
no apparent bond of connexion can be discovered between them, especial
value is set on them. As in most groups of animals, important organs,
such as those for propelling the blood, or for aerating it, or those for
propagating the race, are found nearly uniform, they are considered as
highly serviceable in classification; but in some groups all these,
the most important vital organs, are found to offer characters of quite
subordinate value. Thus, as Fritz Muller has lately remarked, in the
same group of crustaceans, Cypridina is furnished with a heart, while in
two closely allied genera, namely Cypris and Cytherea, there is no such
organ; one species of Cypridina has well-developed branchiae, while
another species is destitute of them.

We can see why characters derived from the embryo should be of
equal importance with those derived from the adult, for a natural
classification of course includes all ages. But it is by no means
obvious, on the ordinary view, why the structure of the embryo should
be more important for this purpose than that of the adult, which alone
plays its full part in the economy of nature. Yet it has been strongly
urged by those great naturalists, Milne Edwards and Agassiz, that
embryological characters are the most important of all; and this
doctrine has very generally been admitted as true. Nevertheless,
their importance has sometimes been exaggerated, owing to the adaptive
characters of larvae not having been excluded; in order to show this,
Fritz Muller arranged, by the aid of such characters alone, the great
class of crustaceans, and the arrangement did not prove a natural one.
But there can be no doubt that embryonic, excluding larval characters,
are of the highest value for classification, not only with animals but
with plants. Thus the main divisions of flowering plants are founded on
differences in the embryo--on the number and position of the cotyledons,
and on the mode of development of the plumule and radicle. We shall
immediately see why these characters possess so high a value in
classification, namely, from the natural system being genealogical in
its arrangement.

Our classifications are often plainly influenced by chains of
affinities. Nothing can be easier than to define a number of characters
common to all birds; but with crustaceans, any such definition has
hitherto been found impossible. There are crustaceans at the opposite
ends of the series, which have hardly a character in common; yet the
species at both ends, from being plainly allied to others, and these to
others, and so onwards, can be recognised as unequivocally belonging to
this, and to no other class of the Articulata.

Geographical distribution has often been used, though perhaps not quite
logically, in classification, more especially in very large groups of
closely allied forms. Temminck insists on the utility or even necessity
of this practice in certain groups of birds; and it has been followed by
several entomologists and botanists.

Finally, with respect to the comparative value of the various groups of
species, such as orders, suborders, families, subfamilies, and genera,
they seem to be, at least at present, almost arbitrary. Several of the
best botanists, such as Mr. Bentham and others, have strongly insisted
on their arbitrary value. Instances could be given among plants and
insects, of a group first ranked by practised naturalists as only a
genus, and then raised to the rank of a subfamily or family; and this
has been done, not because further research has detected important
structural differences, at first overlooked, but because numerous
allied species, with slightly different grades of difference, have been
subsequently discovered.

All the foregoing rules and aids and difficulties in classification may
be explained, if I do not greatly deceive myself, on the view that
the natural system is founded on descent with modification--that the
characters which naturalists consider as showing true affinity between
any two or more species, are those which have been inherited from
a common parent, all true classification being genealogical--that
community of descent is the hidden bond which naturalists have been
unconsciously seeking, and not some unknown plan of creation, or the
enunciation of general propositions, and the mere putting together and
separating objects more or less alike.

But I must explain my meaning more fully. I believe that the ARRANGEMENT
of the groups within each class, in due subordination and relation to
each other, must be strictly genealogical in order to be natural; but
that the AMOUNT of difference in the several branches or groups, though
allied in the same degree in blood to their common progenitor, may
differ greatly, being due to the different degrees of modification which
they have undergone; and this is expressed by the forms being ranked
under different genera, families, sections or orders. The reader will
best understand what is meant, if he will take the trouble to refer to
the diagram in the fourth chapter. We will suppose the letters A to L
to represent allied genera existing during the Silurian epoch, and
descended from some still earlier form. In three of these genera (A,
F, and I) a species has transmitted modified descendants to the present
day, represented by the fifteen genera (a14 to z14) on the uppermost
horizontal line. Now, all these modified descendants from a single
species are related in blood or descent in the same degree. They may
metaphorically be called cousins to the same millionth degree, yet
they differ widely and in different degrees from each other. The forms
descended from A, now broken up into two or three families, constitute
a distinct order from those descended from I, also broken up into two
families. Nor can the existing species descended from A be ranked in
the same genus with the parent A, or those from I with parent I. But the
existing genus F14 may be supposed to have been but slightly modified,
and it will then rank with the parent genus F; just as some few still
living organisms belong to Silurian genera. So that the comparative
value of the differences between these organic beings, which are all
related to each other in the same degree in blood, has come to be widely
different. Nevertheless, their genealogical ARRANGEMENT remains strictly
true, not only at the present time, but at each successive period
of descent. All the modified descendants from A will have inherited
something in common from their common parent, as will all the
descendants from I; so will it be with each subordinate branch of
descendants at each successive stage. If, however, we suppose any
descendant of A or of I to have become so much modified as to have
lost all traces of its parentage in this case, its place in the natural
system will be lost, as seems to have occurred with some few existing
organisms. All the descendants of the genus F, along its whole line of
descent, are supposed to have been but little modified, and they form
a single genus. But this genus, though much isolated, will still occupy
its proper intermediate position. The representation of the groups as
here given in the diagram on a flat surface, is much too simple. The
branches ought to have diverged in all directions. If the names of
the groups had been simply written down in a linear series the
representation would have been still less natural; and it is notoriously
not possible to represent in a series, on a flat surface, the affinities
which we discover in nature among the beings of the same group. Thus,
the natural system is genealogical in its arrangement, like a pedigree.
But the amount of modification which the different groups have undergone
has to be expressed by ranking them under different so-called genera,
subfamilies, families, sections, orders, and classes.

It may be worth while to illustrate this view of classification, by
taking the case of languages. If we possessed a perfect pedigree of
mankind, a genealogical arrangement of the races of man would afford the
best classification of the various languages now spoken throughout the
world; and if all extinct languages, and all intermediate and slowly
changing dialects, were to be included, such an arrangement would be
the only possible one. Yet it might be that some ancient languages had
altered very little and had given rise to few new languages, whilst
others had altered much owing to the spreading, isolation and state of
civilisation of the several co-descended races, and had thus given rise
to many new dialects and languages. The various degrees of difference
between the languages of the same stock would have to be expressed by
groups subordinate to groups; but the proper or even the only possible
arrangement would still be genealogical; and this would be strictly
natural, as it would connect together all languages, extinct and recent,
by the closest affinities, and would give the filiation and origin of
each tongue.

In confirmation of this view, let us glance at the classification of
varieties, which are known or believed to be descended from a single
species. These are grouped under the species, with the subvarieties
under the varieties; and in some cases, as with the domestic pigeon,
with several other grades of difference. Nearly the same rules are
followed as in classifying species. Authors have insisted on the
necessity of arranging varieties on a natural instead of an artificial
system; we are cautioned, for instance, not to class two varieties of
the pine-apple together, merely because their fruit, though the most
important part, happens to be nearly identical; no one puts the Swedish
and common turnip together, though the esculent and thickened stems
are so similar. Whatever part is found to be most constant, is used in
classing varieties: thus the great agriculturist Marshall says the horns
are very useful for this purpose with cattle, because they are less
variable than the shape or colour of the body, etc.; whereas with sheep
the horns are much less serviceable, because less constant. In classing
varieties, I apprehend that if we had a real pedigree, a genealogical
classification would be universally preferred; and it has been attempted
in some cases. For we might feel sure, whether there had been more or
less modification, that the principle of inheritance would keep the
forms together which were allied in the greatest number of points. In
tumbler pigeons, though some of the subvarieties differ in the important
character of the length of the beak, yet all are kept together from
having the common habit of tumbling; but the short-faced breed has
nearly or quite lost this habit; nevertheless, without any thought on
the subject, these tumblers are kept in the same group, because allied
in blood and alike in some other respects.

With species in a state of nature, every naturalist has in fact brought
descent into his classification; for he includes in his lowest grade,
that of species, the two sexes; and how enormously these sometimes
differ in the most important characters is known to every naturalist:
scarcely a single fact can be predicated in common of the adult males
and hermaphrodites of certain cirripedes, and yet no one dreams of
separating them. As soon as the three Orchidean forms, Monachanthus,
Myanthus, and Catasetum, which had previously been ranked as three
distinct genera, were known to be sometimes produced on the same plant,
they were immediately considered as varieties; and now I have been able
to show that they are the male, female, and hermaphrodite forms of the
same species. The naturalist includes as one species the various larval
stages of the same individual, however much they may differ from each
other and from the adult; as well as the so-called alternate generations
of Steenstrup, which can only in a technical sense be considered as
the same individual. He includes monsters and varieties, not from their
partial resemblance to the parent-form, but because they are descended
from it.

As descent has universally been used in classing together the
individuals of the same species, though the males and females and larvae
are sometimes extremely different; and as it has been used in classing
varieties which have undergone a certain, and sometimes a considerable
amount of modification, may not this same element of descent have been
unconsciously used in grouping species under genera, and genera under
higher groups, all under the so-called natural system? I believe it
has been unconsciously used; and thus only can I understand the several
rules and guides which have been followed by our best systematists.
As we have no written pedigrees, we are forced to trace community
of descent by resemblances of any kind. Therefore, we choose those
characters which are the least likely to have been modified, in relation
to the conditions of life to which each species has been recently
exposed. Rudimentary structures on this view are as good as, or even
sometimes better than other parts of the organisation. We care not how
trifling a character may be--let it be the mere inflection of the angle
of the jaw, the manner in which an insect's wing is folded, whether the
skin be covered by hair or feathers--if it prevail throughout many and
different species, especially those having very different habits of
life, it assumes high value; for we can account for its presence in so
many forms with such different habits, only by inheritance from a
common parent. We may err in this respect in regard to single points of
structure, but when several characters, let them be ever so trifling,
concur throughout a large group of beings having different habits, we
may feel almost sure, on the theory of descent, that these characters
have been inherited from a common ancestor; and we know that such
aggregated characters have especial value in classification.

We can understand why a species or a group of species may depart from
its allies, in several of its most important characteristics, and yet be
safely classed with them. This may be safely done, and is often done,
as long as a sufficient number of characters, let them be ever so
unimportant, betrays the hidden bond of community of descent. Let two
forms have not a single character in common, yet, if these extreme forms
are connected together by a chain of intermediate groups, we may at
once infer their community of descent, and we put them all into the same
class. As we find organs of high physiological importance--those
which serve to preserve life under the most diverse conditions of
existence--are generally the most constant, we attach especial value to
them; but if these same organs, in another group or section of a
group, are found to differ much, we at once value them less in our
classification. We shall presently see why embryological characters are
of such high classificatory importance. Geographical distribution
may sometimes be brought usefully into play in classing large genera,
because all the species of the same genus, inhabiting any distinct and
isolated region, are in all probability descended from the same parents.

ANALOGICAL RESEMBLANCES.

We can understand, on the above views, the very important distinction
between real affinities and analogical or adaptive resemblances. Lamarck
first called attention to this subject, and he has been ably followed by
Macleay and others. The resemblance in the shape of the body and in the
fin-like anterior limbs between dugongs and whales, and between these
two orders of mammals and fishes, are analogical. So is the resemblance
between a mouse and a shrew-mouse (Sorex), which belong to different
orders; and the still closer resemblance, insisted on by Mr. Mivart,
between the mouse and a small marsupial animal (Antechinus) of
Australia. These latter resemblances may be accounted for, as it seems
to me, by adaptation for similarly active movements through thickets and
herbage, together with concealment from enemies.

Among insects there are innumerable instances; thus Linnaeus, misled by
external appearances, actually classed an homopterous insect as a moth.
We see something of the same kind even with our domestic varieties, as
in the strikingly similar shape of the body in the improved breeds of
the Chinese and common pig, which are descended from distinct species;
and in the similarly thickened stems of the common and specifically
distinct Swedish turnip. The resemblance between the greyhound and
race-horse is hardly more fanciful than the analogies which have been
drawn by some authors between widely different animals.

On the view of characters being of real importance for classification,
only in so far as they reveal descent, we can clearly understand why
analogical or adaptive characters, although of the utmost importance to
the welfare of the being, are almost valueless to the systematist.
For animals, belonging to two most distinct lines of descent, may have
become adapted to similar conditions, and thus have assumed a close
external resemblance; but such resemblances will not reveal--will rather
tend to conceal their blood-relationship. We can thus also understand
the apparent paradox, that the very same characters are analogical when
one group is compared with another, but give true affinities when the
members of the same group are compared together: thus the shape of the
body and fin-like limbs are only analogical when whales are compared
with fishes, being adaptations in both classes for swimming through
the water; but between the the several members of the whale family, the
shape of the body and the fin-like limbs offer characters exhibiting
true affinity; for as these parts are so nearly similar throughout
the whole family, we cannot doubt that they have been inherited from a
common ancestor. So it is with fishes.

Numerous cases could be given of striking resemblances in quite distinct
beings between single parts or organs, which have been adapted for the
same functions. A good instance is afforded by the close resemblance of
the jaws of the dog and Tasmanian wolf or Thylacinus--animals which are
widely sundered in the natural system. But this resemblance is confined
to general appearance, as in the prominence of the canines, and in the
cutting shape of the molar teeth. For the teeth really differ much: thus
the dog has on each side of the upper jaw four pre-molars and only two
molars; while the Thylacinus has three pre-molars and four molars.
The molars also differ much in the two animals in relative size and
structure. The adult dentition is preceded by a widely different milk
dentition. Any one may, of course, deny that the teeth in either case
have been adapted for tearing flesh, through the natural selection of
successive variations; but if this be admitted in the one case, it is
unintelligible to me that it should be denied in the other. I am glad to
find that so high an authority as Professor Flower has come to this same
conclusion.

The extraordinary cases given in a former chapter, of widely different
fishes possessing electric organs--of widely different insects
possessing luminous organs--and of orchids and asclepiads having
pollen-masses with viscid discs, come under this same head of analogical
resemblances. But these cases are so wonderful that they were introduced
as difficulties or objections to our theory. In all such cases some
fundamental difference in the growth or development of the parts, and
generally in their matured structure, can be detected. The end gained is
the same, but the means, though appearing superficially to be the same,
are essentially different. The principle formerly alluded to under the
term of ANALOGICAL VARIATION has probably in these cases often come into
play; that is, the members of the same class, although only distantly
allied, have inherited so much in common in their constitution, that
they are apt to vary under similar exciting causes in a similar
manner; and this would obviously aid in the acquirement through natural
selection of parts or organs, strikingly like each other, independently
of their direct inheritance from a common progenitor.

As species belonging to distinct classes have often been adapted
by successive slight modifications to live under nearly similar
circumstances--to inhabit, for instance, the three elements of land,
air and water--we can perhaps understand how it is that a numerical
parallelism has sometimes been observed between the subgroups of
distinct classes. A naturalist, struck with a parallelism of this
nature, by arbitrarily raising or sinking the value of the groups in
several classes (and all our experience shows that their valuation is as
yet arbitrary), could easily extend the parallelism over a wide range;
and thus the septenary, quinary, quaternary and ternary classifications
have probably arisen.

There is another and curious class of cases in which close external
resemblance does not depend on adaptation to similar habits of life, but
has been gained for the sake of protection. I allude to the wonderful
manner in which certain butterflies imitate, as first described by Mr.
Bates, other and quite distinct species. This excellent observer has
shown that in some districts of South America, where, for instance, an
Ithomia abounds in gaudy swarms, another butterfly, namely, a Leptalis,
is often found mingled in the same flock; and the latter so closely
resembles the Ithomia in every shade and stripe of colour, and even
in the shape of its wings, that Mr. Bates, with his eyes sharpened
by collecting during eleven years, was, though always on his guard,
continually deceived. When the mockers and the mocked are caught and
compared, they are found to be very different in essential structure,
and to belong not only to distinct genera, but often to distinct
families. Had this mimicry occurred in only one or two instances, it
might have been passed over as a strange coincidence. But, if we proceed
from a district where one Leptalis imitates an Ithomia, another mocking
and mocked species, belonging to the same two genera, equally close in
their resemblance, may be found. Altogether no less than ten genera are
enumerated, which include species that imitate other butterflies. The
mockers and mocked always inhabit the same region; we never find an
imitator living remote from the form which it imitates. The mockers are
almost invariably rare insects; the mocked in almost every case abounds
in swarms. In the same district in which a species of Leptalis closely
imitates an Ithomia, there are sometimes other Lepidoptera mimicking
the same Ithomia: so that in the same place, species of three genera of
butterflies and even a moth are found all closely resembling a butterfly
belonging to a fourth genus. It deserves especial notice that many of
the mimicking forms of the Leptalis, as well as of the mimicked forms,
can be shown by a graduated series to be merely varieties of the same
species; while others are undoubtedly distinct species. But why, it may
be asked, are certain forms treated as the mimicked and others as the
mimickers? Mr. Bates satisfactorily answers this question by showing
that the form which is imitated keeps the usual dress of the group to
which it belongs, while the counterfeiters have changed their dress and
do not resemble their nearest allies.

We are next led to enquire what reason can be assigned for certain
butterflies and moths so often assuming the dress of another and
quite distinct form; why, to the perplexity of naturalists, has nature
condescended to the tricks of the stage? Mr. Bates has, no doubt, hit on
the true explanation. The mocked forms, which always abound in numbers,
must habitually escape destruction to a large extent, otherwise they
could not exist in such swarms; and a large amount of evidence has now
been collected, showing that they are distasteful to birds and other
insect-devouring animals. The mocking forms, on the other hand, that
inhabit the same district, are comparatively rare, and belong to
rare groups; hence, they must suffer habitually from some danger, for
otherwise, from the number of eggs laid by all butterflies, they would
in three or four generations swarm over the whole country. Now if a
member of one of these persecuted and rare groups were to assume a dress
so like that of a well-protected species that it continually deceived
the practised eyes of an entomologist, it would often deceive predaceous
birds and insects, and thus often escape destruction. Mr. Bates may
almost be said to have actually witnessed the process by which the
mimickers have come so closely to resemble the mimicked; for he
found that some of the forms of Leptalis which mimic so many other
butterflies, varied in an extreme degree. In one district several
varieties occurred, and of these one alone resembled, to a certain
extent, the common Ithomia of the same district. In another district
there were two or three varieties, one of which was much commoner than
the others, and this closely mocked another form of Ithomia. From facts
of this nature, Mr. Bates concludes that the Leptalis first varies; and
when a variety happens to resemble in some degree any common butterfly
inhabiting the same district, this variety, from its resemblance to a
flourishing and little persecuted kind, has a better chance of escaping
destruction from predaceous birds and insects, and is consequently
oftener preserved; "the less perfect degrees of resemblance being
generation after generation eliminated, and only the others left to
propagate their kind." So that here we have an excellent illustration of
natural selection.

Messrs. Wallace and Trimen have likewise described several equally
striking cases of imitation in the Lepidoptera of the Malay Archipelago
and Africa, and with some other insects. Mr. Wallace has also detected
one such case with birds, but we have none with the larger quadrupeds.
The much greater frequency of imitation with insects than with other
animals, is probably the consequence of their small size; insects cannot
defend themselves, excepting indeed the kinds furnished with a sting,
and I have never heard of an instance of such kinds mocking other
insects, though they are mocked; insects cannot easily escape by
flight from the larger animals which prey on them; therefore, speaking
metaphorically, they are reduced, like most weak creatures, to trickery
and dissimulation.

It should be observed that the process of imitation probably never
commenced between forms widely dissimilar in colour. But, starting with
species already somewhat like each other, the closest resemblance,
if beneficial, could readily be gained by the above means, and if
the imitated form was subsequently and gradually modified through any
agency, the imitating form would be led along the same track, and thus
be altered to almost any extent, so that it might ultimately assume an
appearance or colouring wholly unlike that of the other members of the
family to which it belonged. There is, however, some difficulty on this
head, for it is necessary to suppose in some cases that ancient members
belonging to several distinct groups, before they had diverged to their
present extent, accidentally resembled a member of another and protected
group in a sufficient degree to afford some slight protection, this
having given the basis for the subsequent acquisition of the most
perfect resemblance.

ON THE NATURE OF THE AFFINITIES CONNECTING ORGANIC BEINGS.

As the modified descendants of dominant species, belonging to the larger
genera, tend to inherit the advantages which made the groups to which
they belong large and their parents dominant, they are almost sure to
spread widely, and to seize on more and more places in the economy of
nature. The larger and more dominant groups within each class thus tend
to go on increasing in size, and they consequently supplant many
smaller and feebler groups. Thus, we can account for the fact that all
organisms, recent and extinct, are included under a few great orders and
under still fewer classes. As showing how few the higher groups are in
number, and how widely they are spread throughout the world, the fact
is striking that the discovery of Australia has not added an insect
belonging to a new class, and that in the vegetable kingdom, as I learn
from Dr. Hooker, it has added only two or three families of small size.

In the chapter on geological succession I attempted to show, on the
principle of each group having generally diverged much in character
during the long-continued process of modification, how it is that the
more ancient forms of life often present characters in some degree
intermediate between existing groups. As some few of the old and
intermediate forms having transmitted to the present day descendants
but little modified, these constitute our so-called osculant or aberrant
groups. The more aberrant any form is, the greater must be the number of
connecting forms which have been exterminated and utterly lost. And
we have evidence of aberrant groups having suffered severely from
extinction, for they are almost always represented by extremely few
species; and such species as do occur are generally very distinct from
each other, which again implies extinction. The genera Ornithorhynchus
and Lepidosiren, for example, would not have been less aberrant had
each been represented by a dozen species, instead of as at present by a
single one, or by two or three. We can, I think, account for this fact
only by looking at aberrant groups as forms which have been conquered
by more successful competitors, with a few members still preserved under
unusually favourable conditions.

Mr. Waterhouse has remarked that when a member belonging to one group of
animals exhibits an affinity to a quite distinct group, this affinity
in most cases is general and not special: thus, according to Mr.
Waterhouse, of all Rodents, the bizcacha is most nearly related to
Marsupials; but in the points in which it approaches this order, its
relations are general, that is, not to any one Marsupial species more
than to another. As these points of affinity are believed to be real
and not merely adaptive, they must be due in accordance with our view to
inheritance from a common progenitor. Therefore, we must suppose either
that all Rodents, including the bizcacha, branched off from some ancient
Marsupial, which will naturally have been more or less intermediate in
character with respect to all existing Marsupials; or that both Rodents
and Marsupials branched off from a common progenitor, and that both
groups have since undergone much modification in divergent directions.
On either view we must suppose that the bizcacha has retained, by
inheritance, more of the character of its ancient progenitor than have
other Rodents; and therefore it will not be specially related to any one
existing Marsupial, but indirectly to all or nearly all Marsupials, from
having partially retained the character of their common progenitor, or
of some early member of the group. On the other hand, of all Marsupials,
as Mr. Waterhouse has remarked, the Phascolomys resembles most nearly,
not any one species, but the general order of Rodents. In this case,
however, it may be strongly suspected that the resemblance is only
analogical, owing to the Phascolomys having become adapted to habits
like those of a Rodent. The elder De Candolle has made nearly similar
observations on the general nature of the affinities of distinct
families of plants.

On the principle of the multiplication and gradual divergence in
character of the species descended from a common progenitor, together
with their retention by inheritance of some characters in common, we can
understand the excessively complex and radiating affinities by which all
the members of the same family or higher group are connected together.
For the common progenitor of a whole family, now broken up by extinction
into distinct groups and subgroups, will have transmitted some of its
characters, modified in various ways and degrees, to all the species;
and they will consequently be related to each other by circuitous lines
of affinity of various lengths (as may be seen in the diagram so often
referred to), mounting up through many predecessors. As it is difficult
to show the blood-relationship between the numerous kindred of any
ancient and noble family, even by the aid of a genealogical tree, and
almost impossible to do so without this aid, we can understand
the extraordinary difficulty which naturalists have experienced in
describing, without the aid of a diagram, the various affinities which
they perceive between the many living and extinct members of the same
great natural class.

Extinction, as we have seen in the fourth chapter, has played an
important part in defining and widening the intervals between the
several groups in each class. We may thus account for the distinctness
of whole classes from each other--for instance, of birds from all other
vertebrate animals--by the belief that many ancient forms of life have
been utterly lost, through which the early progenitors of birds were
formerly connected with the early progenitors of the other and at that
time less differentiated vertebrate classes. There has been much
less extinction of the forms of life which once connected fishes with
Batrachians. There has been still less within some whole classes, for
instance the Crustacea, for here the most wonderfully diverse forms
are still linked together by a long and only partially broken chain of
affinities. Extinction has only defined the groups: it has by no means
made them; for if every form which has ever lived on this earth were
suddenly to reappear, though it would be quite impossible to give
definitions by which each group could be distinguished, still a natural
classification, or at least a natural arrangement, would be possible.
We shall see this by turning to the diagram: the letters, A to L, may
represent eleven Silurian genera, some of which have produced large
groups of modified descendants, with every link in each branch and
sub-branch still alive; and the links not greater than those between
existing varieties. In this case it would be quite impossible to give
definitions by which the several members of the several groups could be
distinguished from their more immediate parents and descendants. Yet the
arrangement in the diagram would still hold good and would be natural;
for, on the principle of inheritance, all the forms descended, for
instance from A, would have something in common. In a tree we can
distinguish this or that branch, though at the actual fork the two unite
and blend together. We could not, as I have said, define the several
groups; but we could pick out types, or forms, representing most of
the characters of each group, whether large or small, and thus give a
general idea of the value of the differences between them. This is what
we should be driven to, if we were ever to succeed in collecting all the
forms in any one class which have lived throughout all time and space.
Assuredly we shall never succeed in making so perfect a collection:
nevertheless, in certain classes, we are tending toward this end;
and Milne Edwards has lately insisted, in an able paper, on the high
importance of looking to types, whether or not we can separate and
define the groups to which such types belong.

Finally, we have seen that natural selection, which follows from the
struggle for existence, and which almost inevitably leads to
extinction and divergence of character in the descendants from any
one parent-species, explains that great and universal feature in the
affinities of all organic beings, namely, their subordination in group
under group. We use the element of descent in classing the individuals
of both sexes and of all ages under one species, although they may have
but few characters in common; we use descent in classing acknowledged
varieties, however different they may be from their parents; and I
believe that this element of descent is the hidden bond of connexion
which naturalists have sought under the term of the Natural System.
On this idea of the natural system being, in so far as it has been
perfected, genealogical in its arrangement, with the grades of
difference expressed by the terms genera, families, orders, etc., we
can understand the rules which we are compelled to follow in our
classification. We can understand why we value certain resemblances far
more than others; why we use rudimentary and useless organs, or others
of trifling physiological importance; why, in finding the relations
between one group and another, we summarily reject analogical or
adaptive characters, and yet use these same characters within the limits
of the same group. We can clearly see how it is that all living and
extinct forms can be grouped together within a few great classes; and
how the several members of each class are connected together by the most
complex and radiating lines of affinities. We shall never, probably,
disentangle the inextricable web of the affinities between the members
of any one class; but when we have a distinct object in view, and do not
look to some unknown plan of creation, we may hope to make sure but slow
progress.

Professor Haeckel in his "Generelle Morphologie" and in another works,
has recently brought his great knowledge and abilities to bear on what
he calls phylogeny, or the lines of descent of all organic beings.
In drawing up the several series he trusts chiefly to embryological
characters, but receives aid from homologous and rudimentary organs, as
well as from the successive periods at which the various forms of life
are believed to have first appeared in our geological formations. He has
thus boldly made a great beginning, and shows us how classification will
in the future be treated.

MORPHOLOGY.

We have seen that the members of the same class, independently of
their habits of life, resemble each other in the general plan of their
organisation. This resemblance is often expressed by the term "unity of
type;" or by saying that the several parts and organs in the different
species of the class are homologous. The whole subject is included under
the general term of Morphology. This is one of the most interesting
departments of natural history, and may almost be said to be its very
soul. What can be more curious than that the hand of a man, formed for
grasping, that of a mole for digging, the leg of the horse, the paddle
of the porpoise, and the wing of the bat, should all be constructed on
the same pattern, and should include similar bones, in the same relative
positions? How curious it is, to give a subordinate though striking
instance, that the hind feet of the kangaroo, which are so well fitted
for bounding over the open plains--those of the climbing, leaf-eating
koala, equally well fitted for grasping the branches of trees--those
of the ground-dwelling, insect or root-eating, bandicoots--and those of
some other Australian marsupials--should all be constructed on the same
extraordinary type, namely with the bones of the second and third digits
extremely slender and enveloped within the same skin, so that they
appear like a single toe furnished with two claws. Notwithstanding this
similarity of pattern, it is obvious that the hind feet of these several
animals are used for as widely different purposes as it is possible to
conceive. The case is rendered all the more striking by the American
opossums, which follow nearly the same habits of life as some of their
Australian relatives, having feet constructed on the ordinary plan.
Professor Flower, from whom these statements are taken, remarks in
conclusion: "We may call this conformity to type, without getting much
nearer to an explanation of the phenomenon;" and he then adds "but is
it not powerfully suggestive of true relationship, of inheritance from a
common ancestor?"

Geoffroy St. Hilaire has strongly insisted on the high importance of
relative position or connexion in homologous parts; they may differ to
almost any extent in form and size, and yet remain connected together in
the same invariable order. We never find, for instance, the bones of
the arm and forearm, or of the thigh and leg, transposed. Hence the same
names can be given to the homologous bones in widely different animals.
We see the same great law in the construction of the mouths of insects:
what can be more different than the immensely long spiral proboscis of a
sphinx-moth, the curious folded one of a bee or bug, and the great jaws
of a beetle? Yet all these organs, serving for such widely different
purposes, are formed by infinitely numerous modifications of an upper
lip, mandibles, and two pairs of maxillae. The same law governs the
construction of the mouths and limbs of crustaceans. So it is with the
flowers of plants.

Nothing can be more hopeless than to attempt to explain this similarity
of pattern in members of the same class, by utility or by the doctrine
of final causes. The hopelessness of the attempt has been expressly
admitted by Owen in his most interesting work on the "Nature of Limbs."
On the ordinary view of the independent creation of each being, we can
only say that so it is; that it has pleased the Creator to construct all
the animals and plants in each great class on a uniform plan; but this
is not a scientific explanation.

The explanation is to a large extent simple, on the theory of the
selection of successive slight modifications, each being profitable in
some way to the modified form, but often affecting by correlation other
parts of the organisation. In changes of this nature, there will be
little or no tendency to alter the original pattern, or to transpose
the parts. The bones of a limb might be shortened and flattened to any
extent, becoming at the same time enveloped in thick membrane, so as to
serve as a fin; or a webbed hand might have all its bones, or certain
bones, lengthened to any extent, with the membrane connecting them
increased, so as to serve as a wing; yet all these modifications would
not tend to alter the framework of the bones or the relative connexion
of the parts. If we suppose that an early progenitor--the archetype,
as it may be called--of all mammals, birds and reptiles, had its limbs
constructed on the existing general pattern, for whatever purpose
they served, we can at once perceive the plain signification of the
homologous construction of the limbs throughout the class. So with the
mouths of insects, we have only to suppose that their common progenitor
had an upper lip, mandibles, and two pairs of maxillae, these parts
being perhaps very simple in form; and then natural selection will
account for the infinite diversity in structure and function of the
mouths of insects. Nevertheless, it is conceivable that the general
pattern of an organ might become so much obscured as to be finally lost,
by the reduction and ultimately by the complete abortion of
certain parts, by the fusion of other parts, and by the doubling or
multiplication of others, variations which we know to be within
the limits of possibility. In the paddles of the gigantic extinct
sea-lizards, and in the mouths of certain suctorial crustaceans, the
general pattern seems thus to have become partially obscured.

There is another and equally curious branch of our subject; namely,
serial homologies, or the comparison of the different parts or organs
in the same individual, and not of the same parts or organs in different
members of the same class. Most physiologists believe that the bones of
the skull are homologous--that is, correspond in number and in relative
connexion--with the elemental parts of a certain number of vertebrae.
The anterior and posterior limbs in all the higher vertebrate classes
are plainly homologous. So it is with the wonderfully complex jaws
and legs of crustaceans. It is familiar to almost every one, that in
a flower the relative position of the sepals, petals, stamens, and
pistils, as well as their intimate structure, are intelligible on the
view that they consist of metamorphosed leaves, arranged in a spire. In
monstrous plants, we often get direct evidence of the possibility of one
organ being transformed into another; and we can actually see, during
the early or embryonic stages of development in flowers, as well as
in crustaceans and many other animals, that organs, which when mature
become extremely different are at first exactly alike.

How inexplicable are the cases of serial homologies on the ordinary view
of creation! Why should the brain be enclosed in a box composed of
such numerous and such extraordinarily shaped pieces of bone apparently
representing vertebrae? As Owen has remarked, the benefit derived
from the yielding of the separate pieces in the act of parturition by
mammals, will by no means explain the same construction in the skulls of
birds and reptiles. Why should similar bones have been created to
form the wing and the leg of a bat, used as they are for such
totally different purposes, namely flying and walking? Why should one
crustacean, which has an extremely complex mouth formed of many parts,
consequently always have fewer legs; or conversely, those with many
legs have simpler mouths? Why should the sepals, petals, stamens, and
pistils, in each flower, though fitted for such distinct purposes, be
all constructed on the same pattern?

On the theory of natural selection, we can, to a certain extent, answer
these questions. We need not here consider how the bodies of some
animals first became divided into a series of segments, or how they
became divided into right and left sides, with corresponding organs, for
such questions are almost beyond investigation. It is, however, probable
that some serial structures are the result of cells multiplying by
division, entailing the multiplication of the parts developed from
such cells. It must suffice for our purpose to bear in mind that
an indefinite repetition of the same part or organ is the common
characteristic, as Owen has remarked, of all low or little specialised
forms; therefore the unknown progenitor of the Vertebrata probably
possessed many vertebrae; the unknown progenitor of the Articulata, many
segments; and the unknown progenitor of flowering plants, many leaves
arranged in one or more spires. We have also formerly seen that parts
many times repeated are eminently liable to vary, not only in number,
but in form. Consequently such parts, being already present in
considerable numbers, and being highly variable, would naturally afford
the materials for adaptation to the most different purposes; yet they
would generally retain, through the force of inheritance, plain traces
of their original or fundamental resemblance. They would retain this
resemblance all the more, as the variations, which afforded the basis
for their subsequent modification through natural selection, would
tend from the first to be similar; the parts being at an early stage of
growth alike, and being subjected to nearly the same conditions. Such
parts, whether more or less modified, unless their common origin became
wholly obscured, would be serially homologous.

In the great class of molluscs, though the parts in distinct species
can be shown to be homologous, only a few serial homologies; such as the
valves of Chitons, can be indicated; that is, we are seldom enabled
to say that one part is homologous with another part in the same
individual. And we can understand this fact; for in molluscs, even
in the lowest members of the class, we do not find nearly so much
indefinite repetition of any one part as we find in the other great
classes of the animal and vegetable kingdoms.

But morphology is a much more complex subject than it at first appears,
as has lately been well shown in a remarkable paper by Mr. E. Ray
Lankester, who has drawn an important distinction between certain
classes of cases which have all been equally ranked by naturalists as
homologous. He proposes to call the structures which resemble each other
in distinct animals, owing to their descent from a common progenitor
with subsequent modification, "homogenous"; and the resemblances which
cannot thus be accounted for, he proposes to call "homoplastic". For
instance, he believes that the hearts of birds and mammals are as a
whole homogenous--that is, have been derived from a common progenitor;
but that the four cavities of the heart in the two classes are
homoplastic--that is, have been independently developed. Mr. Lankester
also adduces the close resemblance of the parts on the right and left
sides of the body, and in the successive segments of the same individual
animal; and here we have parts commonly called homologous which bear no
relation to the descent of distinct species from a common progenitor.
Homoplastic structures are the same with those which I have classed,
though in a very imperfect manner, as analogous modifications or
resemblances. Their formation may be attributed in part to distinct
organisms, or to distinct parts of the same organism, having varied in
an analogous manner; and in part to similar modifications, having
been preserved for the same general purpose or function, of which many
instances have been given.

Naturalists frequently speak of the skull as formed of metamorphosed
vertebrae; the jaws of crabs as metamorphosed legs; the stamens and
pistils in flowers as metamorphosed leaves; but it would in most cases
be more correct, as Professor Huxley has remarked, to speak of both
skull and vertebrae, jaws and legs, etc., as having been metamorphosed,
not one from the other, as they now exist, but from some common and
simpler element. Most naturalists, however, use such language only in a
metaphorical sense: they are far from meaning that during a long course
of descent, primordial organs of any kind--vertebrae in the one case and
legs in the other--have actually been converted into skulls or jaws. Yet
so strong is the appearance of this having occurred that naturalists
can hardly avoid employing language having this plain signification.
According to the views here maintained, such language may be used
literally; and the wonderful fact of the jaws, for instance, of a crab
retaining numerous characters, which they probably would have retained
through inheritance, if they had really been metamorphosed from true
though extremely simple legs, is in part explained.

DEVELOPMENT AND EMBRYOLOGY.

This is one of the most important subjects in the whole round of natural
history. The metamorphoses of insects, with which every one is familiar,
are generally effected abruptly by a few stages; but the transformations
are in reality numerous and gradual, though concealed. A certain
ephemerous insect (Chloeon) during its development, moults, as shown by
Sir J. Lubbock, above twenty times, and each time undergoes a certain
amount of change; and in this case we see the act of metamorphosis
performed in a primary and gradual manner. Many insects, and especially
certain crustaceans, show us what wonderful changes of structure can be
effected during development. Such changes, however, reach their acme in
the so-called alternate generations of some of the lower animals. It is,
for instance, an astonishing fact that a delicate branching coralline,
studded with polypi, and attached to a submarine rock, should produce,
first by budding and then by transverse division, a host of huge
floating jelly-fishes; and that these should produce eggs, from which
are hatched swimming animalcules, which attach themselves to rocks and
become developed into branching corallines; and so on in an endless
cycle. The belief in the essential identity of the process of alternate
generation and of ordinary metamorphosis has been greatly strengthened
by Wagner's discovery of the larva or maggot of a fly, namely the
Cecidomyia, producing asexually other larvae, and these others, which
finally are developed into mature males and females, propagating their
kind in the ordinary manner by eggs.

It may be worth notice that when Wagner's remarkable discovery was first
announced, I was asked how was it possible to account for the larvae of
this fly having acquired the power of a sexual reproduction. As long as
the case remained unique no answer could be given. But already Grimm has
shown that another fly, a Chironomus, reproduces itself in nearly the
same manner, and he believes that this occurs frequently in the order.
It is the pupa, and not the larva, of the Chironomus which has this
power; and Grimm further shows that this case, to a certain extent,
"unites that of the Cecidomyia with the parthenogenesis of the
Coccidae;" the term parthenogenesis implying that the mature females of
the Coccidae are capable of producing fertile eggs without the concourse
of the male. Certain animals belonging to several classes are now known
to have the power of ordinary reproduction at an unusually early age;
and we have only to accelerate parthenogenetic reproduction by gradual
steps to an earlier and earlier age--Chironomus showing us an almost
exactly intermediate stage, viz., that of the pupa--and we can perhaps
account for the marvellous case of the Cecidomyia.

It has already been stated that various parts in the same individual,
which are exactly alike during an early embryonic period, become widely
different and serve for widely different purposes in the adult state. So
again it has been shown that generally the embryos of the most distinct
species belonging to the same class are closely similar, but become,
when fully developed, widely dissimilar. A better proof of this latter
fact cannot be given than the statement by Von Baer that "the embryos of
mammalia, of birds, lizards and snakes, probably also of chelonia, are
in the earliest states exceedingly like one another, both as a whole and
in the mode of development of their parts; so much so, in fact, that we
can often distinguish the embryos only by their size. In my possession
are two little embryos in spirit, whose names I have omitted to attach,
and at present I am quite unable to say to what class they belong. They
may be lizards or small birds, or very young mammalia, so complete is
the similarity in the mode of formation of the head and trunk in these
animals. The extremities, however, are still absent in these embryos.
But even if they had existed in the earliest stage of their development
we should learn nothing, for the feet of lizards and mammals, the wings
and feet of birds, no less than the hands and feet of man, all arise
from the same fundamental form." The larvae of most crustaceans, at
corresponding stages of development, closely resemble each other,
however different the adults may become; and so it is with very many
other animals. A trace of the law of embryonic resemblance occasionally
lasts till a rather late age: thus birds of the same genus, and of
allied genera, often resemble each other in their immature plumage; as
we see in the spotted feathers in the young of the thrush group. In
the cat tribe, most of the species when adult are striped or spotted in
lines; and stripes or spots can be plainly distinguished in the whelp of
the lion and the puma. We occasionally, though rarely, see something of
the same kind in plants; thus the first leaves of the ulex or furze, and
the first leaves of the phyllodineous acacias, are pinnate or divided
like the ordinary leaves of the leguminosae.

The points of structure, in which the embryos of widely different
animals within the same class resemble each other, often have no direct
relation to their conditions of existence. We cannot, for instance,
suppose that in the embryos of the vertebrata the peculiar loop-like
courses of the arteries near the branchial slits are related to similar
conditions--in the young mammal which is nourished in the womb of its
mother, in the egg of the bird which is hatched in a nest, and in the
spawn of a frog under water. We have no more reason to believe in such a
relation than we have to believe that the similar bones in the hand of
a man, wing of a bat, and fin of a porpoise, are related to similar
conditions of life. No one supposes that the stripes on the whelp of
a lion, or the spots on the young blackbird, are of any use to these
animals.

The case, however, is different when an animal, during any part of its
embryonic career, is active, and has to provide for itself. The period
of activity may come on earlier or later in life; but whenever it comes
on, the adaptation of the larva to its conditions of life is just as
perfect and as beautiful as in the adult animal. In how important a
manner this has acted, has recently been well shown by Sir J. Lubbock
in his remarks on the close similarity of the larvae of some insects
belonging to very different orders, and on the dissimilarity of the
larvae of other insects within the same order, according to their habits
of life. Owing to such adaptations the similarity of the larvae of
allied animals is sometimes greatly obscured; especially when there is
a division of labour during the different stages of development, as
when the same larva has during one stage to search for food, and during
another stage has to search for a place of attachment. Cases can even be
given of the larvae of allied species, or groups of species, differing
more from each other than do the adults. In most cases, however, the
larvae, though active, still obey, more or less closely, the law of
common embryonic resemblance. Cirripedes afford a good instance of
this: even the illustrious Cuvier did not perceive that a barnacle was
a crustacean: but a glance at the larva shows this in an unmistakable
manner. So again the two main divisions of cirripedes, the pedunculated
and sessile, though differing widely in external appearance, have larvae
in all their stages barely distinguishable.

The embryo in the course of development generally rises in organisation.
I use this expression, though I am aware that it is hardly possible to
define clearly what is meant by organisation being higher or lower.
But no one probably will dispute that the butterfly is higher than
the caterpillar. In some cases, however, the mature animal must be
considered as lower in the scale than the larva, as with certain
parasitic crustaceans. To refer once again to cirripedes: the larvae in
the first stage have three pairs of locomotive organs, a simple single
eye, and a probosciformed mouth, with which they feed largely, for they
increase much in size. In the second stage, answering to the chrysalis
stage of butterflies, they have six pairs of beautifully constructed
natatory legs, a pair of magnificent compound eyes, and extremely
complex antennae; but they have a closed and imperfect mouth, and
cannot feed: their function at this stage is, to search out by their
well-developed organs of sense, and to reach by their active powers
of swimming, a proper place on which to become attached and to undergo
their final metamorphosis. When this is completed they are fixed for
life: their legs are now converted into prehensile organs; they again
obtain a well-constructed mouth; but they have no antennae, and their
two eyes are now reconverted into a minute, single, simple eye-spot.
In this last and complete state, cirripedes may be considered as
either more highly or more lowly organised than they were in the
larval condition. But in some genera the larvae become developed into
hermaphrodites having the ordinary structure, or into what I have called
complemental males; and in the latter the development has assuredly been
retrograde; for the male is a mere sack, which lives for a short time
and is destitute of mouth, stomach, and every other organ of importance,
excepting those for reproduction.

We are so much accustomed to see a difference in structure between the
embryo and the adult, that we are tempted to look at this difference as
in some necessary manner contingent on growth. But there is no reason
why, for instance, the wing of a bat, or the fin of a porpoise, should
not have been sketched out with all their parts in proper proportion, as
soon as any part became visible. In some whole groups of animals and in
certain members of other groups this is the case, and the embryo does
not at any period differ widely from the adult: thus Owen has remarked
in regard to cuttle-fish, "there is no metamorphosis; the cephalopodic
character is manifested long before the parts of the embryo are
completed." Land-shells and fresh-water crustaceans are born having
their proper forms, while the marine members of the same two great
classes pass through considerable and often great changes during their
development. Spiders, again, barely undergo any metamorphosis. The
larvae of most insects pass through a worm-like stage, whether they are
active and adapted to diversified habits, or are inactive from being
placed in the midst of proper nutriment, or from being fed by their
parents; but in some few cases, as in that of Aphis, if we look to
the admirable drawings of the development of this insect, by Professor
Huxley, we see hardly any trace of the vermiform stage.

Sometimes it is only the earlier developmental stages which fail. Thus,
Fritz Muller has made the remarkable discovery that certain shrimp-like
crustaceans (allied to Penoeus) first appear under the simple
nauplius-form, and after passing through two or more zoea-stages, and
then through the mysis-stage, finally acquire their mature structure:
now in the whole great malacostracan order, to which these crustaceans
belong, no other member is as yet known to be first developed under the
nauplius-form, though many appear as zoeas; nevertheless Muller assigns
reasons for his belief, that if there had been no suppression of
development, all these crustaceans would have appeared as nauplii.

How, then, can we explain these several facts in embryology--namely, the
very general, though not universal, difference in structure between the
embryo and the adult; the various parts in the same individual embryo,
which ultimately become very unlike, and serve for diverse purposes,
being at an early period of growth alike; the common, but not
invariable, resemblance between the embryos or larvae of the most
distinct species in the same class; the embryo often retaining, while
within the egg or womb, structures which are of no service to it, either
at that or at a later period of life; on the other hand, larvae which
have to provide for their own wants, being perfectly adapted to the
surrounding conditions; and lastly, the fact of certain larvae standing
higher in the scale of organisation than the mature animal into which
they are developed? I believe that all these facts can be explained as
follows.

It is commonly assumed, perhaps from monstrosities affecting the embryo
at a very early period, that slight variations or individual differences
necessarily appear at an equally early period. We have little evidence
on this head, but what we have certainly points the other way; for it
is notorious that breeders of cattle, horses and various fancy animals,
cannot positively tell, until some time after birth, what will be the
merits and demerits of their young animals. We see this plainly in our
own children; we cannot tell whether a child will be tall or short, or
what its precise features will be. The question is not, at what period
of life any variation may have been caused, but at what period the
effects are displayed. The cause may have acted, and I believe often has
acted, on one or both parents before the act of generation. It deserves
notice that it is of no importance to a very young animal, as long as it
is nourished and protected by its parent, whether most of its characters
are acquired a little earlier or later in life. It would not signify,
for instance, to a bird which obtained its food by having a much-curved
beak whether or not while young it possessed a beak of this shape, as
long as it was fed by its parents.

I have stated in the first chapter, that at whatever age any variation
first appears in the parent, it tends to reappear at a corresponding age
in the offspring. Certain variations can only appear at corresponding
ages; for instance, peculiarities in the caterpillar, cocoon, or imago
states of the silk-moth; or, again, in the full-grown horns of cattle.
But variations which, for all that we can see might have appeared either
earlier or later in life, likewise tend to reappear at a corresponding
age in the offspring and parent. I am far from meaning that this is
invariably the case, and I could give several exceptional cases of
variations (taking the word in the largest sense) which have supervened
at an earlier age in the child than in the parent.

These two principles, namely, that slight variations generally appear
at a not very early period of life, and are inherited at a corresponding
not early period, explain, as I believe, all the above specified leading
facts in embryology. But first let us look to a few analogous cases in
our domestic varieties. Some authors who have written on Dogs maintain
that the greyhound and bull-dog, though so different, are really closely
allied varieties, descended from the same wild stock, hence I was
curious to see how far their puppies differed from each other. I was
told by breeders that they differed just as much as their parents, and
this, judging by the eye, seemed almost to be the case; but on actually
measuring the old dogs and their six-days-old puppies, I found that
the puppies had not acquired nearly their full amount of proportional
difference. So, again, I was told that the foals of cart and
race-horses--breeds which have been almost wholly formed by selection
under domestication--differed as much as the full-grown animals; but
having had careful measurements made of the dams and of three-days-old
colts of race and heavy cart-horses, I find that this is by no means the
case.

As we have conclusive evidence that the breeds of the Pigeon are
descended from a single wild species, I compared the young pigeons
within twelve hours after being hatched. I carefully measured the
proportions (but will not here give the details) of the beak, width of
mouth, length of nostril and of eyelid, size of feet and length of leg,
in the wild parent species, in pouters, fantails, runts, barbs, dragons,
carriers, and tumblers. Now, some of these birds, when mature, differ in
so extraordinary a manner in the length and form of beak, and in other
characters, that they would certainly have been ranked as distinct
genera if found in a state of nature. But when the nestling birds of
these several breeds were placed in a row, though most of them could
just be distinguished, the proportional differences in the above
specified points were incomparably less than in the full-grown birds.
Some characteristic points of difference--for instance, that of the
width of mouth--could hardly be detected in the young. But there was
one remarkable exception to this rule, for the young of the short-faced
tumbler differed from the young of the wild rock-pigeon, and of the
other breeds, in almost exactly the same proportions as in the adult
stage.

These facts are explained by the above two principles. Fanciers select
their dogs, horses, pigeons, etc., for breeding, when nearly grown up.
They are indifferent whether the desired qualities are acquired earlier
or later in life, if the full-grown animal possesses them. And the
cases just given, more especially that of the pigeons, show that
the characteristic differences which have been accumulated by man's
selection, and which give value to his breeds, do not generally appear
at a very early period of life, and are inherited at a corresponding not
early period. But the case of the short-faced tumbler, which when twelve
hours old possessed its proper characters, proves that this is not the
universal rule; for here the characteristic differences must either have
appeared at an earlier period than usual, or, if not so, the differences
must have been inherited, not at a corresponding, but at an earlier age.

Now, let us apply these two principles to species in a state of nature.
Let us take a group of birds, descended from some ancient form and
modified through natural selection for different habits. Then, from
the many slight successive variations having supervened in the several
species at a not early age, and having been inherited at a corresponding
age, the young will have been but little modified, and they will still
resemble each other much more closely than do the adults, just as we
have seen with the breeds of the pigeon. We may extend this view to
widely distinct structures and to whole classes. The fore-limbs, for
instance, which once served as legs to a remote progenitor, may have
become, through a long course of modification, adapted in one descendant
to act as hands, in another as paddles, in another as wings; but on the
above two principles the fore-limbs will not have been much modified in
the embryos of these several forms; although in each form the fore-limb
will differ greatly in the adult state. Whatever influence long
continued use or disuse may have had in modifying the limbs or other
parts of any species, this will chiefly or solely have affected it when
nearly mature, when it was compelled to use its full powers to gain its
own living; and the effects thus produced will have been transmitted to
the offspring at a corresponding nearly mature age. Thus the young will
not be modified, or will be modified only in a slight degree, through
the effects of the increased use or disuse of parts.

With some animals the successive variations may have supervened at a
very early period of life, or the steps may have been inherited at an
earlier age than that at which they first occurred. In either of these
cases the young or embryo will closely resemble the mature parent-form,
as we have seen with the short-faced tumbler. And this is the rule of
development in certain whole groups, or in certain sub-groups alone,
as with cuttle-fish, land-shells, fresh-water crustaceans, spiders, and
some members of the great class of insects. With respect to the final
cause of the young in such groups not passing through any metamorphosis,
we can see that this would follow from the following contingencies:
namely, from the young having to provide at a very early age for their
own wants, and from their following the same habits of life with their
parents; for in this case it would be indispensable for their existence
that they should be modified in the same manner as their parents. Again,
with respect to the singular fact that many terrestrial and fresh-water
animals do not undergo any metamorphosis, while marine members of the
same groups pass through various transformations, Fritz Muller has
suggested that the process of slowly modifying and adapting an animal
to live on the land or in fresh water, instead of in the sea, would be
greatly simplified by its not passing through any larval stage; for it
is not probable that places well adapted for both the larval and
mature stages, under such new and greatly changed habits of life, would
commonly be found unoccupied or ill-occupied by other organisms. In this
case the gradual acquirement at an earlier and earlier age of the adult
structure would be favoured by natural selection; and all traces of
former metamorphoses would finally be lost.

If, on the other hand, it profited the young of an animal to follow
habits of life slightly different from those of the parent-form, and
consequently to be constructed on a slightly different plan, or if
it profited a larva already different from its parent to change still
further, then, on the principle of inheritance at corresponding ages,
the young or the larvae might be rendered by natural selection more and
more different from their parents to any conceivable extent. Differences
in the larva might, also, become correlated with successive stages of
its development; so that the larva, in the first stage, might come to
differ greatly from the larva in the second stage, as is the case with
many animals. The adult might also become fitted for sites or habits, in
which organs of locomotion or of the senses, etc., would be useless; and
in this case the metamorphosis would be retrograde.

From the remarks just made we can see how by changes of structure in
the young, in conformity with changed habits of life, together with
inheritance at corresponding ages, animals might come to pass through
stages of development, perfectly distinct from the primordial condition
of their adult progenitors. Most of our best authorities are now
convinced that the various larval and pupal stages of insects have thus
been acquired through adaptation, and not through inheritance from some
ancient form. The curious case of Sitaris--a beetle which passes through
certain unusual stages of development--will illustrate how this might
occur. The first larval form is described by M. Fabre, as an active,
minute insect, furnished with six legs, two long antennae, and four
eyes. These larvae are hatched in the nests of bees; and when the male
bees emerge from their burrows, in the spring, which they do before
the females, the larvae spring on them, and afterwards crawl on to the
females while paired with the males. As soon as the female bee deposits
her eggs on the surface of the honey stored in the cells, the larvae of
the Sitaris leap on the eggs and devour them. Afterwards they undergo
a complete change; their eyes disappear; their legs and antennae become
rudimentary, and they feed on honey; so that they now more closely
resemble the ordinary larvae of insects; ultimately they undergo a
further transformation, and finally emerge as the perfect beetle. Now,
if an insect, undergoing transformations like those of the Sitaris, were
to become the progenitor of a whole new class of insects, the course of
development of the new class would be widely different from that of
our existing insects; and the first larval stage certainly would not
represent the former condition of any adult and ancient form.

On the other hand it is highly probable that with many animals the
embryonic or larval stages show us, more or less completely, the
condition of the progenitor of the whole group in its adult state. In
the great class of the Crustacea, forms wonderfully distinct from each
other, namely, suctorial parasites, cirripedes, entomostraca, and even
the malacostraca, appear at first as larvae under the nauplius-form; and
as these larvae live and feed in the open sea, and are not adapted for
any peculiar habits of life, and from other reasons assigned by Fritz
Muller, it is probable that at some very remote period an independent
adult animal, resembling the Nauplius, existed, and subsequently
produced, along several divergent lines of descent, the above-named
great Crustacean groups. So again, it is probable, from what we know of
the embryos of mammals, birds, fishes and reptiles, that these animals
are the modified descendants of some ancient progenitor, which was
furnished in its adult state with branchiae, a swim-bladder, four
fin-like limbs, and a long tail, all fitted for an aquatic life.

As all the organic beings, extinct and recent, which have ever lived,
can be arranged within a few great classes; and as all within each
class have, according to our theory, been connected together by fine
gradations, the best, and, if our collections were nearly perfect, the
only possible arrangement, would be genealogical; descent being the
hidden bond of connexion which naturalists have been seeking under the
term of the Natural System. On this view we can understand how it is
that, in the eyes of most naturalists, the structure of the embryo is
even more important for classification than that of the adult. In two or
more groups of animals, however much they may differ from each other
in structure and habits in their adult condition, if they pass through
closely similar embryonic stages, we may feel assured that they are all
descended from one parent-form, and are therefore closely related.
Thus, community in embryonic structure reveals community of descent; but
dissimilarity in embryonic development does not prove discommunity of
descent, for in one of two groups the developmental stages may have been
suppressed, or may have been so greatly modified through adaptation to
new habits of life as to be no longer recognisable. Even in groups, in
which the adults have been modified to an extreme degree, community of
origin is often revealed by the structure of the larvae; we have seen,
for instance, that cirripedes, though externally so like shell-fish,
are at once known by their larvae to belong to the great class of
crustaceans. As the embryo often shows us more or less plainly the
structure of the less modified and ancient progenitor of the group, we
can see why ancient and extinct forms so often resemble in their
adult state the embryos of existing species of the same class. Agassiz
believes this to be a universal law of nature; and we may hope hereafter
to see the law proved true. It can, however, be proved true only in
those cases in which the ancient state of the progenitor of the group
has not been wholly obliterated, either by successive variations having
supervened at a very early period of growth, or by such variations
having been inherited at an earlier age than that at which they first
appeared. It should also be borne in mind, that the law may be true,
but yet, owing to the geological record not extending far enough back
in time, may remain for a long period, or for ever, incapable of
demonstration. The law will not strictly hold good in those cases in
which an ancient form became adapted in its larval state to some special
line of life, and transmitted the same larval state to a whole group
of descendants; for such larval state will not resemble any still more
ancient form in its adult state.

Thus, as it seems to me, the leading facts in embryology, which
are second to none in importance, are explained on the principle of
variations in the many descendants from some one ancient progenitor,
having appeared at a not very early period of life, and having been
inherited at a corresponding period. Embryology rises greatly in
interest, when we look at the embryo as a picture, more or less
obscured, of the progenitor, either in its adult or larval state, of all
the members of the same great class.

RUDIMENTARY, ATROPHIED, AND ABORTED ORGANS.

Organs or parts in this strange condition, bearing the plain stamp of
inutility, are extremely common, or even general, throughout nature. It
would be impossible to name one of the higher animals in which some
part or other is not in a rudimentary condition. In the mammalia, for
instance, the males possess rudimentary mammae; in snakes one lobe of
the lungs is rudimentary; in birds the "bastard-wing" may safely be
considered as a rudimentary digit, and in some species the whole wing is
so far rudimentary that it cannot be used for flight. What can be more
curious than the presence of teeth in foetal whales, which when grown up
have not a tooth in their heads; or the teeth, which never cut through
the gums, in the upper jaws of unborn calves?

Rudimentary organs plainly declare their origin and meaning in various
ways. There are beetles belonging to closely allied species, or even
to the same identical species, which have either full-sized and perfect
wings, or mere rudiments of membrane, which not rarely lie under
wing-covers firmly soldered together; and in these cases it is
impossible to doubt, that the rudiments represent wings. Rudimentary
organs sometimes retain their potentiality: this occasionally occurs
with the mammae of male mammals, which have been known to become well
developed and to secrete milk. So again in the udders of the genus Bos,
there are normally four developed and two rudimentary teats; but the
latter in our domestic cows sometimes become well developed and yield
milk. In regard to plants, the petals are sometimes rudimentary, and
sometimes well developed in the individuals of the same species. In
certain plants having separated sexes Kolreuter found that by crossing a
species, in which the male flowers included a rudiment of a pistil, with
an hermaphrodite species, having of course a well-developed pistil, the
rudiment in the hybrid offspring was much increased in size; and this
clearly shows that the rudimentary and perfect pistils are essentially
alike in nature. An animal may possess various parts in a perfect state,
and yet they may in one sense be rudimentary, for they are useless: thus
the tadpole of the common salamander or water-newt, as Mr. G.H. Lewes
remarks, "has gills, and passes its existence in the water; but the
Salamandra atra, which lives high up among the mountains, brings forth
its young full-formed. This animal never lives in the water. Yet if
we open a gravid female, we find tadpoles inside her with exquisitely
feathered gills; and when placed in water they swim about like the
tadpoles of the water-newt. Obviously this aquatic organisation has no
reference to the future life of the animal, nor has it any adaptation
to its embryonic condition; it has solely reference to ancestral
adaptations, it repeats a phase in the development of its progenitors."

An organ, serving for two purposes, may become rudimentary or utterly
aborted for one, even the more important purpose, and remain perfectly
efficient for the other. Thus, in plants, the office of the pistil is
to allow the pollen-tubes to reach the ovules within the ovarium.
The pistil consists of a stigma supported on the style; but in some
Compositae, the male florets, which of course cannot be fecundated, have
a rudimentary pistil, for it is not crowned with a stigma; but the style
remains well developed and is clothed in the usual manner with hairs,
which serve to brush the pollen out of the surrounding and conjoined
anthers. Again, an organ may become rudimentary for its proper purpose,
and be used for a distinct one: in certain fishes the swim-bladder seems
to be rudimentary for its proper function of giving buoyancy, but has
become converted into a nascent breathing organ or lung. Many similar
instances could be given.

Useful organs, however little they may be developed, unless we have
reason to suppose that they were formerly more highly developed, ought
not to be considered as rudimentary. They may be in a nascent condition,
and in progress towards further development. Rudimentary organs, on
the other hand, are either quite useless, such as teeth which never cut
through the gums, or almost useless, such as the wings of an ostrich,
which serve merely as sails. As organs in this condition would formerly,
when still less developed, have been of even less use than at present,
they cannot formerly have been produced through variation and
natural selection, which acts solely by the preservation of useful
modifications. They have been partially retained by the power of
inheritance, and relate to a former state of things. It is, however,
often difficult to distinguish between rudimentary and nascent organs;
for we can judge only by analogy whether a part is capable of further
development, in which case alone it deserves to be called nascent.
Organs in this condition will always be somewhat rare; for beings thus
provided will commonly have been supplanted by their successors with the
same organ in a more perfect state, and consequently will have become
long ago extinct. The wing of the penguin is of high service, acting as
a fin; it may, therefore, represent the nascent state of the wing: not
that I believe this to be the case; it is more probably a reduced organ,
modified for a new function: the wing of the Apteryx, on the other hand,
is quite useless, and is truly rudimentary. Owen considers the simple
filamentary limbs of the Lepidosiren as the "beginnings of organs
which attain full functional development in higher vertebrates;" but,
according to the view lately advocated by Dr. Gunther, they are probably
remnants, consisting of the persistent axis of a fin, with the lateral
rays or branches aborted. The mammary glands of the Ornithorhynchus may
be considered, in comparison with the udders of a cow, as in a nascent
condition. The ovigerous frena of certain cirripedes, which have ceased
to give attachment to the ova and are feebly developed, are nascent
branchiae.

Rudimentary organs in the individuals of the same species are very
liable to vary in the degree of their development and in other respects.
In closely allied species, also, the extent to which the same organ
has been reduced occasionally differs much. This latter fact is well
exemplified in the state of the wings of female moths belonging to
the same family. Rudimentary organs may be utterly aborted; and this
implies, that in certain animals or plants, parts are entirely absent
which analogy would lead us to expect to find in them, and which
are occasionally found in monstrous individuals. Thus in most of
the Scrophulariaceae the fifth stamen is utterly aborted; yet we may
conclude that a fifth stamen once existed, for a rudiment of it is found
in many species of the family, and this rudiment occasionally becomes
perfectly developed, as may sometimes be seen in the common snap-dragon.
In tracing the homologies of any part in different members of the same
class, nothing is more common, or, in order fully to understand the
relations of the parts, more useful than the discovery of rudiments.
This is well shown in the drawings given by Owen of the leg bones of the
horse, ox, and rhinoceros.

It is an important fact that rudimentary organs, such as teeth in the
upper jaws of whales and ruminants, can often be detected in the embryo,
but afterwards wholly disappear. It is also, I believe, a universal
rule, that a rudimentary part is of greater size in the embryo
relatively to the adjoining parts, than in the adult; so that the organ
at this early age is less rudimentary, or even cannot be said to be in
any degree rudimentary. Hence rudimentary organs in the adult are often
said to have retained their embryonic condition.

I have now given the leading facts with respect to rudimentary organs.
In reflecting on them, every one must be struck with astonishment; for
the same reasoning power which tells us that most parts and organs are
exquisitely adapted for certain purposes, tells us with equal plainness
that these rudimentary or atrophied organs are imperfect and useless. In
works on natural history, rudimentary organs are generally said to have
been created "for the sake of symmetry," or in order "to complete the
scheme of nature." But this is not an explanation, merely a restatement
of the fact. Nor is it consistent with itself: thus the boa-constrictor
has rudiments of hind limbs and of a pelvis, and if it be said that
these bones have been retained "to complete the scheme of nature," why,
as Professor Weismann asks, have they not been retained by other snakes,
which do not possess even a vestige of these same bones? What would be
thought of an astronomer who maintained that the satellites revolve in
elliptic courses round their planets "for the sake of symmetry," because
the planets thus revolve round the sun? An eminent physiologist accounts
for the presence of rudimentary organs, by supposing that they serve to
excrete matter in excess, or matter injurious to the system; but can we
suppose that the minute papilla, which often represents the pistil in
male flowers, and which is formed of mere cellular tissue, can thus act?
Can we suppose that rudimentary teeth, which are subsequently absorbed,
are beneficial to the rapidly growing embryonic calf by removing
matter so precious as phosphate of lime? When a man's fingers have been
amputated, imperfect nails have been known to appear on the stumps, and
I could as soon believe that these vestiges of nails are developed in
order to excrete horny matter, as that the rudimentary nails on the fin
of the manatee have been developed for this same purpose.

On the view of descent with modification, the origin of rudimentary
organs is comparatively simple; and we can understand to a large extent
the laws governing their imperfect development. We have plenty of cases
of rudimentary organs in our domestic productions, as the stump of a
tail in tailless breeds, the vestige of an ear in earless breeds of
sheep--the reappearance of minute dangling horns in hornless breeds of
cattle, more especially, according to Youatt, in young animals--and the
state of the whole flower in the cauliflower. We often see rudiments of
various parts in monsters; but I doubt whether any of these cases throw
light on the origin of rudimentary organs in a state of nature, further
than by showing that rudiments can be produced; for the balance of
evidence clearly indicates that species under nature do not undergo
great and abrupt changes. But we learn from the study of our domestic
productions that the disuse of parts leads to their reduced size; and
that the result is inherited.

It appears probable that disuse has been the main agent in rendering
organs rudimentary. It would at first lead by slow steps to the more
and more complete reduction of a part, until at last it became
rudimentary--as in the case of the eyes of animals inhabiting dark
caverns, and of the wings of birds inhabiting oceanic islands, which
have seldom been forced by beasts of prey to take flight, and have
ultimately lost the power of flying. Again, an organ, useful under
certain conditions, might become injurious under others, as with the
wings of beetles living on small and exposed islands; and in this case
natural selection will have aided in reducing the organ, until it was
rendered harmless and rudimentary.

Any change in structure and function, which can be effected by small
stages, is within the power of natural selection; so that an organ
rendered, through changed habits of life, useless or injurious for one
purpose, might be modified and used for another purpose. An organ
might, also, be retained for one alone of its former functions. Organs,
originally formed by the aid of natural selection, when rendered useless
may well be variable, for their variations can no longer be checked by
natural selection. All this agrees well with what we see under nature.
Moreover, at whatever period of life either disuse or selection reduces
an organ, and this will generally be when the being has come to maturity
and to exert its full powers of action, the principle of inheritance at
corresponding ages will tend to reproduce the organ in its reduced state
at the same mature age, but will seldom affect it in the embryo. Thus
we can understand the greater size of rudimentary organs in the embryo
relatively to the adjoining parts, and their lesser relative size in the
adult. If, for instance, the digit of an adult animal was used less and
less during many generations, owing to some change of habits, or if an
organ or gland was less and less functionally exercised, we may infer
that it would become reduced in size in the adult descendants of this
animal, but would retain nearly its original standard of development in
the embryo.

There remains, however, this difficulty. After an organ has ceased being
used, and has become in consequence much reduced, how can it be still
further reduced in size until the merest vestige is left; and how can it
be finally quite obliterated? It is scarcely possible that disuse can go
on producing any further effect after the organ has once been rendered
functionless. Some additional explanation is here requisite which I
cannot give. If, for instance, it could be proved that every part of the
organisation tends to vary in a greater degree towards diminution than
toward augmentation of size, then we should be able to understand how an
organ which has become useless would be rendered, independently of the
effects of disuse, rudimentary and would at last be wholly suppressed;
for the variations towards diminished size would no longer be checked by
natural selection. The principle of the economy of growth, explained in
a former chapter, by which the materials forming any part, if not useful
to the possessor, are saved as far as is possible, will perhaps come
into play in rendering a useless part rudimentary. But this principle
will almost necessarily be confined to the earlier stages of the process
of reduction; for we cannot suppose that a minute papilla, for instance,
representing in a male flower the pistil of the female flower, and
formed merely of cellular tissue, could be further reduced or absorbed
for the sake of economising nutriment.

Finally, as rudimentary organs, by whatever steps they may have been
degraded into their present useless condition, are the record of a
former state of things, and have been retained solely through the
power of inheritance--we can understand, on the genealogical view of
classification, how it is that systematists, in placing organisms in
their proper places in the natural system, have often found rudimentary
parts as useful as, or even sometimes more useful than, parts of high
physiological importance. Rudimentary organs may be compared with the
letters in a word, still retained in the spelling, but become useless in
the pronunciation, but which serve as a clue for its derivation. On the
view of descent with modification, we may conclude that the existence
of organs in a rudimentary, imperfect, and useless condition, or quite
aborted, far from presenting a strange difficulty, as they assuredly
do on the old doctrine of creation, might even have been anticipated in
accordance with the views here explained.

SUMMARY.

In this chapter I have attempted to show that the arrangement of all
organic beings throughout all time in groups under groups--that the
nature of the relationships by which all living and extinct organisms
are united by complex, radiating, and circuitous lines of affinities
into a few grand classes--the rules followed and the difficulties
encountered by naturalists in their classifications--the value set upon
characters, if constant and prevalent, whether of high or of the
most trifling importance, or, as with rudimentary organs of no
importance--the wide opposition in value between analogical or adaptive
characters, and characters of true affinity; and other such rules--all
naturally follow if we admit the common parentage of allied forms,
together with their modification through variation and natural
selection, with the contingencies of extinction and divergence of
character. In considering this view of classification, it should be
borne in mind that the element of descent has been universally used
in ranking together the sexes, ages, dimorphic forms, and acknowledged
varieties of the same species, however much they may differ from each
other in structure. If we extend the use of this element of descent--the
one certainly known cause of similarity in organic beings--we shall
understand what is meant by the Natural System: it is genealogical in
its attempted arrangement, with the grades of acquired difference marked
by the terms, varieties, species, genera, families, orders, and classes.

On this same view of descent with modification, most of the great facts
in Morphology become intelligible--whether we look to the same pattern
displayed by the different species of the same class in their homologous
organs, to whatever purpose applied, or to the serial and lateral
homologies in each individual animal and plant.

On the principle of successive slight variations, not necessarily
or generally supervening at a very early period of life, and being
inherited at a corresponding period, we can understand the leading facts
in embryology; namely, the close resemblance in the individual embryo
of the parts which are homologous, and which when matured become
widely different in structure and function; and the resemblance of the
homologous parts or organs in allied though distinct species, though
fitted in the adult state for habits as different as is possible. Larvae
are active embryos, which have become specially modified in a greater
or less degree in relation to their habits of life, with their
modifications inherited at a corresponding early age. On these same
principles, and bearing in mind that when organs are reduced in size,
either from disuse or through natural selection, it will generally be at
that period of life when the being has to provide for its own wants, and
bearing in mind how strong is the force of inheritance--the occurrence
of rudimentary organs might even have been anticipated. The importance
of embryological characters and of rudimentary organs in classification
is intelligible, on the view that a natural arrangement must be
genealogical.

Finally, the several classes of facts which have been considered in
this chapter, seem to me to proclaim so plainly, that the innumerable
species, genera and families, with which this world is peopled, are all
descended, each within its own class or group, from common parents, and
have all been modified in the course of descent, that I should without
hesitation adopt this view, even if it were unsupported by other facts
or arguments.




CHAPTER XV. RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION.

 Recapitulation of the objections to the theory of Natural
 Selection--Recapitulation of the general and special circumstances
 in its favour--Causes of the general belief in the immutability
 of species--How far the theory of Natural Selection may be
 extended--Effects of its adoption on the study of Natural
 History--Concluding remarks.


As this whole volume is one long argument, it may be convenient to the
reader to have the leading facts and inferences briefly recapitulated.

That many and serious objections may be advanced against the theory of
descent with modification through variation and natural selection, I do
not deny. I have endeavoured to give to them their full force. Nothing
at first can appear more difficult to believe than that the more complex
organs and instincts have been perfected, not by means superior
to, though analogous with, human reason, but by the accumulation of
innumerable slight variations, each good for the individual possessor.
Nevertheless, this difficulty, though appearing to our imagination
insuperably great, cannot be considered real if we admit the following
propositions, namely, that all parts of the organisation and instincts
offer, at least individual differences--that there is a struggle for
existence leading to the preservation of profitable deviations of
structure or instinct--and, lastly, that gradations in the state of
perfection of each organ may have existed, each good of its kind. The
truth of these propositions cannot, I think, be disputed.

It is, no doubt, extremely difficult even to conjecture by what
gradations many structures have been perfected, more especially among
broken and failing groups of organic beings, which have suffered much
extinction; but we see so many strange gradations in nature, that we
ought to be extremely cautious in saying that any organ or instinct, or
any whole structure, could not have arrived at its present state by
many graduated steps. There are, it must be admitted, cases of special
difficulty opposed to the theory of natural selection; and one of the
most curious of these is the existence in the same community of two
or three defined castes of workers or sterile female ants; but I have
attempted to show how these difficulties can be mastered.

With respect to the almost universal sterility of species when first
crossed, which forms so remarkable a contrast with the almost universal
fertility of varieties when crossed, I must refer the reader to the
recapitulation of the facts given at the end of the ninth chapter, which
seem to me conclusively to show that this sterility is no more a special
endowment than is the incapacity of two distinct kinds of trees to be
grafted together; but that it is incidental on differences confined to
the reproductive systems of the intercrossed species. We see the truth
of this conclusion in the vast difference in the results of crossing the
same two species reciprocally--that is, when one species is first used
as the father and then as the mother. Analogy from the consideration of
dimorphic and trimorphic plants clearly leads to the same conclusion,
for when the forms are illegitimately united, they yield few or no seed,
and their offspring are more or less sterile; and these forms belong
to the same undoubted species, and differ from each other in no respect
except in their reproductive organs and functions.

Although the fertility of varieties when intercrossed, and of their
mongrel offspring, has been asserted by so many authors to be universal,
this cannot be considered as quite correct after the facts given on the
high authority of Gartner and Kolreuter. Most of the varieties which
have been experimented on have been produced under domestication; and as
domestication (I do not mean mere confinement) almost certainly tends
to eliminate that sterility which, judging from analogy, would have
affected the parent-species if intercrossed, we ought not to expect
that domestication would likewise induce sterility in their modified
descendants when crossed. This elimination of sterility apparently
follows from the same cause which allows our domestic animals to breed
freely under diversified circumstances; and this again apparently
follows from their having been gradually accustomed to frequent changes
in their conditions of life.

A double and parallel series of facts seems to throw much light on the
sterility of species, when first crossed, and of their hybrid offspring.
On the one side, there is good reason to believe that slight changes in
the conditions of life give vigour and fertility to all organic beings.
We know also that a cross between the distinct individuals of the same
variety, and between distinct varieties, increases the number of their
offspring, and certainly gives to them increased size and vigour. This
is chiefly owing to the forms which are crossed having been exposed
to somewhat different conditions of life; for I have ascertained by a
labourious series of experiments that if all the individuals of the same
variety be subjected during several generations to the same conditions,
the good derived from crossing is often much diminished or wholly
disappears. This is one side of the case. On the other side, we know
that species which have long been exposed to nearly uniform conditions,
when they are subjected under confinement to new and greatly changed
conditions, either perish, or if they survive, are rendered sterile,
though retaining perfect health. This does not occur, or only in a very
slight degree, with our domesticated productions, which have long been
exposed to fluctuating conditions. Hence when we find that hybrids
produced by a cross between two distinct species are few in number,
owing to their perishing soon after conception or at a very early age,
or if surviving that they are rendered more or less sterile, it seems
highly probable that this result is due to their having been in fact
subjected to a great change in their conditions of life, from being
compounded of two distinct organisations. He who will explain in a
definite manner why, for instance, an elephant or a fox will not breed
under confinement in its native country, whilst the domestic pig or dog
will breed freely under the most diversified conditions, will at the
same time be able to give a definite answer to the question why two
distinct species, when crossed, as well as their hybrid offspring,
are generally rendered more or less sterile, while two domesticated
varieties when crossed and their mongrel offspring are perfectly
fertile.

Turning to geographical distribution, the difficulties encountered on
the theory of descent with modification are serious enough. All the
individuals of the same species, and all the species of the same genus,
or even higher group, are descended from common parents; and therefore,
in however distant and isolated parts of the world they may now be
found, they must in the course of successive generations have travelled
from some one point to all the others. We are often wholly unable even
to conjecture how this could have been effected. Yet, as we have reason
to believe that some species have retained the same specific form for
very long periods of time, immensely long as measured by years, too much
stress ought not to be laid on the occasional wide diffusion of the same
species; for during very long periods there will always have been a good
chance for wide migration by many means. A broken or interrupted range
may often be accounted for by the extinction of the species in the
intermediate regions. It cannot be denied that we are as yet
very ignorant as to the full extent of the various climatical and
geographical changes which have affected the earth during modern
periods; and such changes will often have facilitated migration. As an
example, I have attempted to show how potent has been the influence of
the Glacial period on the distribution of the same and of allied species
throughout the world. We are as yet profoundly ignorant of the many
occasional means of transport. With respect to distinct species of the
same genus, inhabiting distant and isolated regions, as the process of
modification has necessarily been slow, all the means of migration
will have been possible during a very long period; and consequently the
difficulty of the wide diffusion of the species of the same genus is in
some degree lessened.

As according to the theory of natural selection an interminable number
of intermediate forms must have existed, linking together all the
species in each group by gradations as fine as our existing varieties,
it may be asked, Why do we not see these linking forms all around us?
Why are not all organic beings blended together in an inextricable
chaos? With respect to existing forms, we should remember that we
have no right to expect (excepting in rare cases) to discover DIRECTLY
connecting links between them, but only between each and some extinct
and supplanted form. Even on a wide area, which has during a long period
remained continuous, and of which the climatic and other conditions of
life change insensibly in proceeding from a district occupied by one
species into another district occupied by a closely allied species, we
have no just right to expect often to find intermediate varieties in
the intermediate zones. For we have reason to believe that only a few
species of a genus ever undergo change; the other species becoming
utterly extinct and leaving no modified progeny. Of the species which do
change, only a few within the same country change at the same time;
and all modifications are slowly effected. I have also shown that
the intermediate varieties which probably at first existed in the
intermediate zones, would be liable to be supplanted by the allied forms
on either hand; for the latter, from existing in greater numbers,
would generally be modified and improved at a quicker rate than the
intermediate varieties, which existed in lesser numbers; so that
the intermediate varieties would, in the long run, be supplanted and
exterminated.

On this doctrine of the extermination of an infinitude of connecting
links, between the living and extinct inhabitants of the world, and at
each successive period between the extinct and still older species, why
is not every geological formation charged with such links? Why does
not every collection of fossil remains afford plain evidence of the
gradation and mutation of the forms of life? Although geological
research has undoubtedly revealed the former existence of many links,
bringing numerous forms of life much closer together, it does not yield
the infinitely many fine gradations between past and present species
required on the theory, and this is the most obvious of the many
objections which may be urged against it. Why, again, do whole groups
of allied species appear, though this appearance is often false, to have
come in suddenly on the successive geological stages? Although we
now know that organic beings appeared on this globe, at a period
incalculably remote, long before the lowest bed of the Cambrian system
was deposited, why do we not find beneath this system great piles
of strata stored with the remains of the progenitors of the Cambrian
fossils? For on the theory, such strata must somewhere have been
deposited at these ancient and utterly unknown epochs of the world's
history.

I can answer these questions and objections only on the supposition
that the geological record is far more imperfect than most geologists
believe. The number of specimens in all our museums is absolutely as
nothing compared with the countless generations of countless species
which have certainly existed. The parent form of any two or more species
would not be in all its characters directly intermediate between
its modified offspring, any more than the rock-pigeon is directly
intermediate in crop and tail between its descendants, the pouter and
fantail pigeons. We should not be able to recognise a species as the
parent of another and modified species, if we were to examine the two
ever so closely, unless we possessed most of the intermediate links;
and owing to the imperfection of the geological record, we have no just
right to expect to find so many links. If two or three, or even more
linking forms were discovered, they would simply be ranked by many
naturalists as so many new species, more especially if found in
different geological substages, let their differences be ever so slight.
Numerous existing doubtful forms could be named which are probably
varieties; but who will pretend that in future ages so many fossil links
will be discovered, that naturalists will be able to decide whether
or not these doubtful forms ought to be called varieties? Only a small
portion of the world has been geologically explored. Only organic beings
of certain classes can be preserved in a fossil condition, at least
in any great number. Many species when once formed never undergo any
further change but become extinct without leaving modified descendants;
and the periods during which species have undergone modification, though
long as measured by years, have probably been short in comparison with
the periods during which they retained the same form. It is the dominant
and widely ranging species which vary most frequently and vary most, and
varieties are often at first local--both causes rendering the discovery
of intermediate links in any one formation less likely. Local
varieties will not spread into other and distant regions until they are
considerably modified and improved; and when they have spread, and are
discovered in a geological formation, they appear as if suddenly created
there, and will be simply classed as new species. Most formations have
been intermittent in their accumulation; and their duration has probably
been shorter than the average duration of specific forms. Successive
formations are in most cases separated from each other by blank
intervals of time of great length, for fossiliferous formations
thick enough to resist future degradation can, as a general rule, be
accumulated only where much sediment is deposited on the subsiding bed
of the sea. During the alternate periods of elevation and of stationary
level the record will generally be blank. During these latter periods
there will probably be more variability in the forms of life; during
periods of subsidence, more extinction.

With respect to the absence of strata rich in fossils beneath the
Cambrian formation, I can recur only to the hypothesis given in the
tenth chapter; namely, that though our continents and oceans have
endured for an enormous period in nearly their present relative
positions, we have no reason to assume that this has always been the
case; consequently formations much older than any now known may lie
buried beneath the great oceans. With respect to the lapse of time not
having been sufficient since our planet was consolidated for the assumed
amount of organic change, and this objection, as urged by Sir William
Thompson, is probably one of the gravest as yet advanced, I can only
say, firstly, that we do not know at what rate species change, as
measured by years, and secondly, that many philosophers are not as yet
willing to admit that we know enough of the constitution of the universe
and of the interior of our globe to speculate with safety on its past
duration.

That the geological record is imperfect all will admit; but that it is
imperfect to the degree required by our theory, few will be inclined
to admit. If we look to long enough intervals of time, geology plainly
declares that species have all changed; and they have changed in the
manner required by the theory, for they have changed slowly and in
a graduated manner. We clearly see this in the fossil remains from
consecutive formations invariably being much more closely related to
each other than are the fossils from widely separated formations.

Such is the sum of the several chief objections and difficulties
which may justly be urged against the theory; and I have now briefly
recapitulated the answers and explanations which, as far as I can see,
may be given. I have felt these difficulties far too heavily during many
years to doubt their weight. But it deserves especial notice that
the more important objections relate to questions on which we are
confessedly ignorant; nor do we know how ignorant we are. We do not know
all the possible transitional gradations between the simplest and the
most perfect organs; it cannot be pretended that we know all the varied
means of Distribution during the long lapse of years, or that we
know how imperfect is the Geological Record. Serious as these several
objections are, in my judgment they are by no means sufficient to
overthrow the theory of descent with subsequent modification.

Now let us turn to the other side of the argument. Under domestication
we see much variability, caused, or at least excited, by changed
conditions of life; but often in so obscure a manner, that we are
tempted to consider the variations as spontaneous. Variability is
governed by many complex laws, by correlated growth, compensation,
the increased use and disuse of parts, and the definite action of the
surrounding conditions. There is much difficulty in ascertaining how
largely our domestic productions have been modified; but we may safely
infer that the amount has been large, and that modifications can be
inherited for long periods. As long as the conditions of life remain the
same, we have reason to believe that a modification, which has already
been inherited for many generations, may continue to be inherited for
an almost infinite number of generations. On the other hand we have
evidence that variability, when it has once come into play, does not
cease under domestication for a very long period; nor do we know that
it ever ceases, for new varieties are still occasionally produced by our
oldest domesticated productions.

Variability is not actually caused by man; he only unintentionally
exposes organic beings to new conditions of life and then nature acts on
the organisation and causes it to vary. But man can and does select
the variations given to him by nature, and thus accumulates them in any
desired manner. He thus adapts animals and plants for his own benefit or
pleasure. He may do this methodically, or he may do it unconsciously by
preserving the individuals most useful or pleasing to him without any
intention of altering the breed. It is certain that he can largely
influence the character of a breed by selecting, in each successive
generation, individual differences so slight as to be inappreciable
except by an educated eye. This unconscious process of selection has
been the great agency in the formation of the most distinct and useful
domestic breeds. That many breeds produced by man have to a large extent
the character of natural species, is shown by the inextricable doubts
whether many of them are varieties or aboriginally distinct species.

There is no reason why the principles which have acted so efficiently
under domestication should not have acted under nature. In the survival
of favoured individuals and races, during the constantly recurrent
Struggle for Existence, we see a powerful and ever-acting form of
Selection. The struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high
geometrical ratio of increase which is common to all organic beings.
This high rate of increase is proved by calculation--by the rapid
increase of many animals and plants during a succession of peculiar
seasons, and when naturalised in new countries. More individuals are
born than can possibly survive. A grain in the balance may determine
which individuals shall live and which shall die--which variety or
species shall increase in number, and which shall decrease, or finally
become extinct. As the individuals of the same species come in all
respects into the closest competition with each other, the struggle will
generally be most severe between them; it will be almost equally severe
between the varieties of the same species, and next in severity between
the species of the same genus. On the other hand the struggle will often
be severe between beings remote in the scale of nature. The slightest
advantage in certain individuals, at any age or during any season, over
those with which they come into competition, or better adaptation in
however slight a degree to the surrounding physical conditions, will, in
the long run, turn the balance.

With animals having separated sexes, there will be in most cases a
struggle between the males for the possession of the females. The most
vigorous males, or those which have most successfully struggled with
their conditions of life, will generally leave most progeny. But success
will often depend on the males having special weapons or means of
defence or charms; and a slight advantage will lead to victory.

As geology plainly proclaims that each land has undergone great physical
changes, we might have expected to find that organic beings have varied
under nature, in the same way as they have varied under domestication.
And if there has been any variability under nature, it would be an
unaccountable fact if natural selection had not come into play. It has
often been asserted, but the assertion is incapable of proof, that the
amount of variation under nature is a strictly limited quantity. Man,
though acting on external characters alone and often capriciously,
can produce within a short period a great result by adding up mere
individual differences in his domestic productions; and every one
admits that species present individual differences. But, besides such
differences, all naturalists admit that natural varieties exist,
which are considered sufficiently distinct to be worthy of record
in systematic works. No one has drawn any clear distinction between
individual differences and slight varieties; or between more plainly
marked varieties and subspecies and species. On separate continents, and
on different parts of the same continent, when divided by barriers of
any kind, and on outlying islands, what a multitude of forms exist,
which some experienced naturalists rank as varieties, others as
geographical races or sub species, and others as distinct, though
closely allied species!

If, then, animals and plants do vary, let it be ever so slightly or
slowly, why should not variations or individual differences, which are
in any way beneficial, be preserved and accumulated through natural
selection, or the survival of the fittest? If man can by patience select
variations useful to him, why, under changing and complex conditions
of life, should not variations useful to nature's living products often
arise, and be preserved or selected? What limit can be put to this
power, acting during long ages and rigidly scrutinising the whole
constitution, structure, and habits of each creature, favouring the good
and rejecting the bad? I can see no limit to this power, in slowly and
beautifully adapting each form to the most complex relations of life.
The theory of natural selection, even if we look no further than
this, seems to be in the highest degree probable. I have already
recapitulated, as fairly as I could, the opposed difficulties and
objections: now let us turn to the special facts and arguments in favour
of the theory.

On the view that species are only strongly marked and permanent
varieties, and that each species first existed as a variety, we can
see why it is that no line of demarcation can be drawn between species,
commonly supposed to have been produced by special acts of creation,
and varieties which are acknowledged to have been produced by secondary
laws. On this same view we can understand how it is that in a region
where many species of a genus have been produced, and where they now
flourish, these same species should present many varieties; for where
the manufactory of species has been active, we might expect, as a
general rule, to find it still in action; and this is the case if
varieties be incipient species. Moreover, the species of the larger
genera, which afford the greater number of varieties or incipient
species, retain to a certain degree the character of varieties; for
they differ from each other by a less amount of difference than do the
species of smaller genera. The closely allied species also of a larger
genera apparently have restricted ranges, and in their affinities they
are clustered in little groups round other species--in both respects
resembling varieties. These are strange relations on the view that each
species was independently created, but are intelligible if each existed
first as a variety.

As each species tends by its geometrical rate of reproduction to
increase inordinately in number; and as the modified descendants of
each species will be enabled to increase by as much as they become more
diversified in habits and structure, so as to be able to seize on many
and widely different places in the economy of nature, there will be a
constant tendency in natural selection to preserve the most divergent
offspring of any one species. Hence during a long-continued course of
modification, the slight differences characteristic of varieties of
the same species, tend to be augmented into the greater differences
characteristic of the species of the same genus. New and improved
varieties will inevitably supplant and exterminate the older, less
improved and intermediate varieties; and thus species are rendered to a
large extent defined and distinct objects. Dominant species belonging
to the larger groups within each class tend to give birth to new and
dominant forms; so that each large group tends to become still larger,
and at the same time more divergent in character. But as all groups
cannot thus go on increasing in size, for the world would not hold them,
the more dominant groups beat the less dominant. This tendency in the
large groups to go on increasing in size and diverging in character,
together with the inevitable contingency of much extinction, explains
the arrangement of all the forms of life in groups subordinate to
groups, all within a few great classes, which has prevailed throughout
all time. This grand fact of the grouping of all organic beings under
what is called the Natural System, is utterly inexplicable on the theory
of creation.

As natural selection acts solely by accumulating slight, successive,
favourable variations, it can produce no great or sudden modifications;
it can act only by short and slow steps. Hence, the canon of "Natura
non facit saltum," which every fresh addition to our knowledge tends
to confirm, is on this theory intelligible. We can see why throughout
nature the same general end is gained by an almost infinite diversity of
means, for every peculiarity when once acquired is long inherited, and
structures already modified in many different ways have to be adapted
for the same general purpose. We can, in short, see why nature is
prodigal in variety, though niggard in innovation. But why this should
be a law of nature if each species has been independently created no man
can explain.

Many other facts are, as it seems to me, explicable on this theory. How
strange it is that a bird, under the form of a woodpecker, should prey
on insects on the ground; that upland geese, which rarely or never swim,
would possess webbed feet; that a thrush-like bird should dive and feed
on sub-aquatic insects; and that a petrel should have the habits and
structure fitting it for the life of an auk! and so in endless other
cases. But on the view of each species constantly trying to increase in
number, with natural selection always ready to adapt the slowly varying
descendants of each to any unoccupied or ill-occupied place in nature,
these facts cease to be strange, or might even have been anticipated.

We can to a certain extent understand how it is that there is so much
beauty throughout nature; for this may be largely attributed to the
agency of selection. That beauty, according to our sense of it, is not
universal, must be admitted by every one who will look at some venomous
snakes, at some fishes, and at certain hideous bats with a distorted
resemblance to the human face. Sexual selection has given the most
brilliant colours, elegant patterns, and other ornaments to the males,
and sometimes to both sexes of many birds, butterflies and other
animals. With birds it has often rendered the voice of the male musical
to the female, as well as to our ears. Flowers and fruit have been
rendered conspicuous by brilliant colours in contrast with the green
foliage, in order that the flowers may be easily seen, visited and
fertilised by insects, and the seeds disseminated by birds. How it comes
that certain colours, sounds and forms should give pleasure to man and
the lower animals, that is, how the sense of beauty in its simplest form
was first acquired, we do not know any more than how certain odours and
flavours were first rendered agreeable.

As natural selection acts by competition, it adapts and improves the
inhabitants of each country only in relation to their co-inhabitants;
so that we need feel no surprise at the species of any one country,
although on the ordinary view supposed to have been created and
specially adapted for that country, being beaten and supplanted by the
naturalised productions from another land. Nor ought we to marvel if all
the contrivances in nature be not, as far as we can judge, absolutely
perfect; as in the case even of the human eye; or if some of them be
abhorrent to our ideas of fitness. We need not marvel at the sting of
the bee, when used against the enemy, causing the bee's own death; at
drones being produced in such great numbers for one single act, and
being then slaughtered by their sterile sisters; at the astonishing
waste of pollen by our fir-trees; at the instinctive hatred of the
queen-bee for her own fertile daughters; at ichneumonidae feeding within
the living bodies of caterpillars; and at other such cases. The wonder,
indeed, is, on the theory of natural selection, that more cases of the
want of absolute perfection have not been detected.

The complex and little known laws governing the production of varieties
are the same, as far as we can judge, with the laws which have governed
the production of distinct species. In both cases physical conditions
seem to have produced some direct and definite effect, but how much
we cannot say. Thus, when varieties enter any new station, they
occasionally assume some of the characters proper to the species of that
station. With both varieties and species, use and disuse seem to have
produced a considerable effect; for it is impossible to resist this
conclusion when we look, for instance, at the logger-headed duck, which
has wings incapable of flight, in nearly the same condition as in the
domestic duck; or when we look at the burrowing tucu-tucu, which is
occasionally blind, and then at certain moles, which are habitually
blind and have their eyes covered with skin; or when we look at the
blind animals inhabiting the dark caves of America and Europe. With
varieties and species, correlated variation seems to have played an
important part, so that when one part has been modified other parts have
been necessarily modified. With both varieties and species, reversions
to long-lost characters occasionally occur. How inexplicable on the
theory of creation is the occasional appearance of stripes on the
shoulders and legs of the several species of the horse-genus and of
their hybrids! How simply is this fact explained if we believe that
these species are all descended from a striped progenitor, in the same
manner as the several domestic breeds of the pigeon are descended from
the blue and barred rock-pigeon!

On the ordinary view of each species having been independently created,
why should specific characters, or those by which the species of the
same genus differ from each other, be more variable than the generic
characters in which they all agree? Why, for instance, should the colour
of a flower be more likely to vary in any one species of a genus, if
the other species possess differently coloured flowers, than if all
possessed the same coloured flowers? If species are only well-marked
varieties, of which the characters have become in a high degree
permanent, we can understand this fact; for they have already varied
since they branched off from a common progenitor in certain characters,
by which they have come to be specifically distinct from each other;
therefore these same characters would be more likely again to vary than
the generic characters which have been inherited without change for an
immense period. It is inexplicable on the theory of creation why a part
developed in a very unusual manner in one species alone of a genus,
and therefore, as we may naturally infer, of great importance to that
species, should be eminently liable to variation; but, on our view, this
part has undergone, since the several species branched off from a common
progenitor, an unusual amount of variability and modification, and
therefore we might expect the part generally to be still variable. But
a part may be developed in the most unusual manner, like the wing of a
bat, and yet not be more variable than any other structure, if the part
be common to many subordinate forms, that is, if it has been inherited
for a very long period; for in this case it will have been rendered
constant by long-continued natural selection.

Glancing at instincts, marvellous as some are, they offer no greater
difficulty than do corporeal structures on the theory of the natural
selection of successive, slight, but profitable modifications. We
can thus understand why nature moves by graduated steps in endowing
different animals of the same class with their several instincts. I have
attempted to show how much light the principle of gradation throws on
the admirable architectural powers of the hive-bee. Habit no doubt
often comes into play in modifying instincts; but it certainly is not
indispensable, as we see in the case of neuter insects, which leave no
progeny to inherit the effects of long-continued habit. On the view of
all the species of the same genus having descended from a common parent,
and having inherited much in common, we can understand how it is that
allied species, when placed under widely different conditions of life,
yet follow nearly the same instincts; why the thrushes of tropical and
temperate South America, for instance, line their nests with mud
like our British species. On the view of instincts having been slowly
acquired through natural selection, we need not marvel at some instincts
being not perfect and liable to mistakes, and at many instincts causing
other animals to suffer.

If species be only well-marked and permanent varieties, we can at once
see why their crossed offspring should follow the same complex laws
in their degrees and kinds of resemblance to their parents--in being
absorbed into each other by successive crosses, and in other such
points--as do the crossed offspring of acknowledged varieties. This
similarity would be a strange fact, if species had been independently
created and varieties had been produced through secondary laws.

If we admit that the geological record is imperfect to an extreme
degree, then the facts, which the record does give, strongly support the
theory of descent with modification. New species have come on the stage
slowly and at successive intervals; and the amount of change after
equal intervals of time, is widely different in different groups. The
extinction of species and of whole groups of species, which has played
so conspicuous a part in the history of the organic world, almost
inevitably follows from the principle of natural selection; for old
forms are supplanted by new and improved forms. Neither single species
nor groups of species reappear when the chain of ordinary generation
is once broken. The gradual diffusion of dominant forms, with the slow
modification of their descendants, causes the forms of life, after
long intervals of time, to appear as if they had changed simultaneously
throughout the world. The fact of the fossil remains of each formation
being in some degree intermediate in character between the fossils
in the formations above and below, is simply explained by their
intermediate position in the chain of descent. The grand fact that all
extinct beings can be classed with all recent beings, naturally follows
from the living and the extinct being the offspring of common parents.
As species have generally diverged in character during their long course
of descent and modification, we can understand why it is that the more
ancient forms, or early progenitors of each group, so often occupy a
position in some degree intermediate between existing groups. Recent
forms are generally looked upon as being, on the whole, higher in the
scale of organisation than ancient forms; and they must be higher, in
so far as the later and more improved forms have conquered the older and
less improved forms in the struggle for life; they have also generally
had their organs more specialised for different functions. This fact is
perfectly compatible with numerous beings still retaining simple and but
little improved structures, fitted for simple conditions of life; it is
likewise compatible with some forms having retrograded in organisation,
by having become at each stage of descent better fitted for new and
degraded habits of life. Lastly, the wonderful law of the long endurance
of allied forms on the same continent--of marsupials in Australia, of
edentata in America, and other such cases--is intelligible, for within
the same country the existing and the extinct will be closely allied by
descent.

Looking to geographical distribution, if we admit that there has been
during the long course of ages much migration from one part of the world
to another, owing to former climatical and geographical changes and
to the many occasional and unknown means of dispersal, then we can
understand, on the theory of descent with modification, most of the
great leading facts in Distribution. We can see why there should be so
striking a parallelism in the distribution of organic beings throughout
space, and in their geological succession throughout time; for in both
cases the beings have been connected by the bond of ordinary generation,
and the means of modification have been the same. We see the full
meaning of the wonderful fact, which has struck every traveller, namely,
that on the same continent, under the most diverse conditions, under
heat and cold, on mountain and lowland, on deserts and marshes, most of
the inhabitants within each great class are plainly related; for they
are the descendants of the same progenitors and early colonists. On
this same principle of former migration, combined in most cases with
modification, we can understand, by the aid of the Glacial period, the
identity of some few plants, and the close alliance of many others, on
the most distant mountains, and in the northern and southern temperate
zones; and likewise the close alliance of some of the inhabitants of the
sea in the northern and southern temperate latitudes, though separated
by the whole intertropical ocean. Although two countries may present
physical conditions as closely similar as the same species ever require,
we need feel no surprise at their inhabitants being widely different,
if they have been for a long period completely sundered from each other;
for as the relation of organism to organism is the most important of
all relations, and as the two countries will have received colonists at
various periods and in different proportions, from some other country
or from each other, the course of modification in the two areas will
inevitably have been different.

On this view of migration, with subsequent modification, we see why
oceanic islands are inhabited by only few species, but of these, why
many are peculiar or endemic forms. We clearly see why species belonging
to those groups of animals which cannot cross wide spaces of the ocean,
as frogs and terrestrial mammals, do not inhabit oceanic islands; and
why, on the other hand, new and peculiar species of bats, animals which
can traverse the ocean, are often found on islands far distant from any
continent. Such cases as the presence of peculiar species of bats on
oceanic islands and the absence of all other terrestrial mammals,
are facts utterly inexplicable on the theory of independent acts of
creation.

The existence of closely allied representative species in any two areas,
implies, on the theory of descent with modification, that the same
parent-forms formerly inhabited both areas; and we almost invariably
find that wherever many closely allied species inhabit two areas, some
identical species are still common to both. Wherever many closely allied
yet distinct species occur, doubtful forms and varieties belonging to
the same groups likewise occur. It is a rule of high generality that the
inhabitants of each area are related to the inhabitants of the nearest
source whence immigrants might have been derived. We see this in the
striking relation of nearly all the plants and animals of the Galapagos
Archipelago, of Juan Fernandez, and of the other American islands, to
the plants and animals of the neighbouring American mainland; and of
those of the Cape de Verde Archipelago, and of the other African islands
to the African mainland. It must be admitted that these facts receive no
explanation on the theory of creation.

The fact, as we have seen, that all past and present organic beings can
be arranged within a few great classes, in groups subordinate to groups,
and with the extinct groups often falling in between the recent
groups, is intelligible on the theory of natural selection with its
contingencies of extinction and divergence of character. On these same
principles we see how it is that the mutual affinities of the forms
within each class are so complex and circuitous. We see why certain
characters are far more serviceable than others for classification; why
adaptive characters, though of paramount importance to the beings, are
of hardly any importance in classification; why characters derived from
rudimentary parts, though of no service to the beings, are often of high
classificatory value; and why embryological characters are often the
most valuable of all. The real affinities of all organic beings, in
contradistinction to their adaptive resemblances, are due to inheritance
or community of descent. The Natural System is a genealogical
arrangement, with the acquired grades of difference, marked by the
terms, varieties, species, genera, families, etc.; and we have to
discover the lines of descent by the most permanent characters, whatever
they may be, and of however slight vital importance.

The similar framework of bones in the hand of a man, wing of a bat,
fin of the porpoise, and leg of the horse--the same number of vertebrae
forming the neck of the giraffe and of the elephant--and innumerable
other such facts, at once explain themselves on the theory of descent
with slow and slight successive modifications. The similarity of pattern
in the wing and in the leg of a bat, though used for such different
purpose--in the jaws and legs of a crab--in the petals, stamens, and
pistils of a flower, is likewise, to a large extent, intelligible on
the view of the gradual modification of parts or organs, which were
aboriginally alike in an early progenitor in each of these classes.
On the principle of successive variations not always supervening at an
early age, and being inherited at a corresponding not early period of
life, we clearly see why the embryos of mammals, birds, reptiles, and
fishes should be so closely similar, and so unlike the adult forms. We
may cease marvelling at the embryo of an air-breathing mammal or bird
having branchial slits and arteries running in loops, like those of
a fish which has to breathe the air dissolved in water by the aid of
well-developed branchiae.

Disuse, aided sometimes by natural selection, will often have reduced
organs when rendered useless under changed habits or conditions of life;
and we can understand on this view the meaning of rudimentary organs.
But disuse and selection will generally act on each creature, when it
has come to maturity and has to play its full part in the struggle for
existence, and will thus have little power on an organ during early
life; hence the organ will not be reduced or rendered rudimentary at
this early age. The calf, for instance, has inherited teeth, which never
cut through the gums of the upper jaw, from an early progenitor having
well-developed teeth; and we may believe, that the teeth in the mature
animal were formerly reduced by disuse owing to the tongue and palate,
or lips, having become excellently fitted through natural selection to
browse without their aid; whereas in the calf, the teeth have been left
unaffected, and on the principle of inheritance at corresponding ages
have been inherited from a remote period to the present day. On the
view of each organism with all its separate parts having been specially
created, how utterly inexplicable is it that organs bearing the plain
stamp of inutility, such as the teeth in the embryonic calf or the
shrivelled wings under the soldered wing-covers of many beetles, should
so frequently occur. Nature may be said to have taken pains to
reveal her scheme of modification, by means of rudimentary organs,
of embryological and homologous structures, but we are too blind to
understand her meaning.

I have now recapitulated the facts and considerations which have
thoroughly convinced me that species have been modified, during a long
course of descent. This has been effected chiefly through the natural
selection of numerous successive, slight, favourable variations; aided
in an important manner by the inherited effects of the use and disuse
of parts; and in an unimportant manner, that is, in relation to adaptive
structures, whether past or present, by the direct action of external
conditions, and by variations which seem to us in our ignorance to arise
spontaneously. It appears that I formerly underrated the frequency
and value of these latter forms of variation, as leading to permanent
modifications of structure independently of natural selection. But as my
conclusions have lately been much misrepresented, and it has been stated
that I attribute the modification of species exclusively to natural
selection, I may be permitted to remark that in the first edition
of this work, and subsequently, I placed in a most conspicuous
position--namely, at the close of the Introduction--the following words:
"I am convinced that natural selection has been the main but not the
exclusive means of modification." This has been of no avail. Great is
the power of steady misrepresentation; but the history of science shows
that fortunately this power does not long endure.

It can hardly be supposed that a false theory would explain, in so
satisfactory a manner as does the theory of natural selection, the
several large classes of facts above specified. It has recently been
objected that this is an unsafe method of arguing; but it is a method
used in judging of the common events of life, and has often been used
by the greatest natural philosophers. The undulatory theory of light has
thus been arrived at; and the belief in the revolution of the earth on
its own axis was until lately supported by hardly any direct evidence.
It is no valid objection that science as yet throws no light on the far
higher problem of the essence or origin of life. Who can explain what
is the essence of the attraction of gravity? No one now objects
to following out the results consequent on this unknown element of
attraction; notwithstanding that Leibnitz formerly accused Newton of
introducing "occult qualities and miracles into philosophy."

I see no good reasons why the views given in this volume should shock
the religious feelings of any one. It is satisfactory, as showing how
transient such impressions are, to remember that the greatest discovery
ever made by man, namely, the law of the attraction of gravity, was also
attacked by Leibnitz, "as subversive of natural, and inferentially of
revealed, religion." A celebrated author and divine has written to
me that "he has gradually learned to see that it is just as noble a
conception of the Deity to believe that He created a few original forms
capable of self-development into other and needful forms, as to believe
that He required a fresh act of creation to supply the voids caused by
the action of His laws."

Why, it may be asked, until recently did nearly all the most eminent
living naturalists and geologists disbelieve in the mutability of
species? It cannot be asserted that organic beings in a state of nature
are subject to no variation; it cannot be proved that the amount of
variation in the course of long ages is a limited quantity; no clear
distinction has been, or can be, drawn between species and well-marked
varieties. It cannot be maintained that species when intercrossed are
invariably sterile and varieties invariably fertile; or that sterility
is a special endowment and sign of creation. The belief that species
were immutable productions was almost unavoidable as long as the history
of the world was thought to be of short duration; and now that we have
acquired some idea of the lapse of time, we are too apt to assume,
without proof, that the geological record is so perfect that it would
have afforded us plain evidence of the mutation of species, if they had
undergone mutation.

But the chief cause of our natural unwillingness to admit that one
species has given birth to other and distinct species, is that we are
always slow in admitting any great changes of which we do not see the
steps. The difficulty is the same as that felt by so many geologists,
when Lyell first insisted that long lines of inland cliffs had been
formed, and great valleys excavated, by the agencies which we still see
at work. The mind cannot possibly grasp the full meaning of the term of
even a million years; it cannot add up and perceive the full effects of
many slight variations, accumulated during an almost infinite number of
generations.

Although I am fully convinced of the truth of the views given in this
volume under the form of an abstract, I by no means expect to convince
experienced naturalists whose minds are stocked with a multitude of
facts all viewed, during a long course of years, from a point of view
directly opposite to mine. It is so easy to hide our ignorance under
such expressions as the "plan of creation," "unity of design," etc., and
to think that we give an explanation when we only restate a fact. Any
one whose disposition leads him to attach more weight to unexplained
difficulties than to the explanation of a certain number of facts
will certainly reject the theory. A few naturalists, endowed with
much flexibility of mind, and who have already begun to doubt the
immutability of species, may be influenced by this volume; but I look
with confidence to the future, to young and rising naturalists, who will
be able to view both sides of the question with impartiality. Whoever
is led to believe that species are mutable will do good service by
conscientiously expressing his conviction; for thus only can the load of
prejudice by which this subject is overwhelmed be removed.

Several eminent naturalists have of late published their belief that
a multitude of reputed species in each genus are not real species; but
that other species are real, that is, have been independently created.
This seems to me a strange conclusion to arrive at. They admit that
a multitude of forms, which till lately they themselves thought were
special creations, and which are still thus looked at by the majority of
naturalists, and which consequently have all the external characteristic
features of true species--they admit that these have been produced by
variation, but they refuse to extend the same view to other and slightly
different forms. Nevertheless, they do not pretend that they can define,
or even conjecture, which are the created forms of life, and which are
those produced by secondary laws. They admit variation as a vera causa
in one case, they arbitrarily reject it in another, without assigning
any distinction in the two cases. The day will come when this will
be given as a curious illustration of the blindness of preconceived
opinion. These authors seem no more startled at a miraculous act of
creation than at an ordinary birth. But do they really believe that at
innumerable periods in the earth's history certain elemental atoms have
been commanded suddenly to flash into living tissues? Do they believe
that at each supposed act of creation one individual or many were
produced? Were all the infinitely numerous kinds of animals and plants
created as eggs or seed, or as full grown? and in the case of mammals,
were they created bearing the false marks of nourishment from the
mother's womb? Undoubtedly some of these same questions cannot be
answered by those who believe in the appearance or creation of only a
few forms of life or of some one form alone. It has been maintained
by several authors that it is as easy to believe in the creation of a
million beings as of one; but Maupertuis' philosophical axiom "of least
action" leads the mind more willingly to admit the smaller number; and
certainly we ought not to believe that innumerable beings within each
great class have been created with plain, but deceptive, marks of
descent from a single parent.

As a record of a former state of things, I have retained in the
foregoing paragraphs, and elsewhere, several sentences which imply that
naturalists believe in the separate creation of each species; and I have
been much censured for having thus expressed myself. But undoubtedly
this was the general belief when the first edition of the present work
appeared. I formerly spoke to very many naturalists on the subject of
evolution, and never once met with any sympathetic agreement. It is
probable that some did then believe in evolution, but they were either
silent or expressed themselves so ambiguously that it was not easy to
understand their meaning. Now, things are wholly changed, and almost
every naturalist admits the great principle of evolution. There are,
however, some who still think that species have suddenly given birth,
through quite unexplained means, to new and totally different forms.
But, as I have attempted to show, weighty evidence can be opposed to the
admission of great and abrupt modifications. Under a scientific point of
view, and as leading to further investigation, but little advantage
is gained by believing that new forms are suddenly developed in an
inexplicable manner from old and widely different forms, over the old
belief in the creation of species from the dust of the earth.

It may be asked how far I extend the doctrine of the modification of
species. The question is difficult to answer, because the more distinct
the forms are which we consider, by so much the arguments in favour of
community of descent become fewer in number and less in force. But some
arguments of the greatest weight extend very far. All the members of
whole classes are connected together by a chain of affinities, and all
can be classed on the same principle, in groups subordinate to groups.
Fossil remains sometimes tend to fill up very wide intervals between
existing orders.

Organs in a rudimentary condition plainly show that an early progenitor
had the organ in a fully developed condition, and this in some
cases implies an enormous amount of modification in the descendants.
Throughout whole classes various structures are formed on the same
pattern, and at a very early age the embryos closely resemble each
other. Therefore I cannot doubt that the theory of descent with
modification embraces all the members of the same great class or
kingdom. I believe that animals are descended from at most only four or
five progenitors, and plants from an equal or lesser number.

Analogy would lead me one step further, namely, to the belief that all
animals and plants are descended from some one prototype. But analogy
may be a deceitful guide. Nevertheless all living things have much in
common, in their chemical composition, their cellular structure, their
laws of growth, and their liability to injurious influences. We see
this even in so trifling a fact as that the same poison often similarly
affects plants and animals; or that the poison secreted by the gall-fly
produces monstrous growths on the wild rose or oak-tree. With all
organic beings, excepting perhaps some of the very lowest, sexual
reproduction seems to be essentially similar. With all, as far as is at
present known, the germinal vesicle is the same; so that all
organisms start from a common origin. If we look even to the two main
divisions--namely, to the animal and vegetable kingdoms--certain
low forms are so far intermediate in character that naturalists have
disputed to which kingdom they should be referred. As Professor Asa Gray
has remarked, "the spores and other reproductive bodies of many of the
lower algae may claim to have first a characteristically animal, and
then an unequivocally vegetable existence." Therefore, on the principle
of natural selection with divergence of character, it does not seem
incredible that, from some such low and intermediate form, both animals
and plants may have been developed; and, if we admit this, we must
likewise admit that all the organic beings which have ever lived on this
earth may be descended from some one primordial form. But this inference
is chiefly grounded on analogy, and it is immaterial whether or not it
be accepted. No doubt it is possible, as Mr. G.H. Lewes has urged, that
at the first commencement of life many different forms were evolved;
but if so, we may conclude that only a very few have left modified
descendants. For, as I have recently remarked in regard to the members
of each great kingdom, such as the Vertebrata, Articulata, etc., we have
distinct evidence in their embryological, homologous, and rudimentary
structures, that within each kingdom all the members are descended from
a single progenitor.

When the views advanced by me in this volume, and by Mr. Wallace or when
analogous views on the origin of species are generally admitted, we can
dimly foresee that there will be a considerable revolution in natural
history. Systematists will be able to pursue their labours as at
present; but they will not be incessantly haunted by the shadowy doubt
whether this or that form be a true species. This, I feel sure and I
speak after experience, will be no slight relief. The endless disputes
whether or not some fifty species of British brambles are good species
will cease. Systematists will have only to decide (not that this will be
easy) whether any form be sufficiently constant and distinct from
other forms, to be capable of definition; and if definable, whether the
differences be sufficiently important to deserve a specific name. This
latter point will become a far more essential consideration than it is
at present; for differences, however slight, between any two forms,
if not blended by intermediate gradations, are looked at by most
naturalists as sufficient to raise both forms to the rank of species.

Hereafter we shall be compelled to acknowledge that the only distinction
between species and well-marked varieties is, that the latter are
known, or believed to be connected at the present day by intermediate
gradations, whereas species were formerly thus connected. Hence, without
rejecting the consideration of the present existence of intermediate
gradations between any two forms, we shall be led to weigh more
carefully and to value higher the actual amount of difference between
them. It is quite possible that forms now generally acknowledged to be
merely varieties may hereafter be thought worthy of specific names; and
in this case scientific and common language will come into accordance.
In short, we shall have to treat species in the same manner as those
naturalists treat genera, who admit that genera are merely artificial
combinations made for convenience. This may not be a cheering prospect;
but we shall at least be freed from the vain search for the undiscovered
and undiscoverable essence of the term species.

The other and more general departments of natural history will rise
greatly in interest. The terms used by naturalists, of affinity,
relationship, community of type, paternity, morphology, adaptive
characters, rudimentary and aborted organs, etc., will cease to be
metaphorical and will have a plain signification. When we no longer look
at an organic being as a savage looks at a ship, as something wholly
beyond his comprehension; when we regard every production of nature
as one which has had a long history; when we contemplate every complex
structure and instinct as the summing up of many contrivances, each
useful to the possessor, in the same way as any great mechanical
invention is the summing up of the labour, the experience, the reason,
and even the blunders of numerous workmen; when we thus view each
organic being, how far more interesting--I speak from experience--does
the study of natural history become!

A grand and almost untrodden field of inquiry will be opened, on the
causes and laws of variation, on correlation, on the effects of use and
disuse, on the direct action of external conditions, and so forth.
The study of domestic productions will rise immensely in value. A new
variety raised by man will be a far more important and interesting
subject for study than one more species added to the infinitude of
already recorded species. Our classifications will come to be, as far as
they can be so made, genealogies; and will then truly give what may be
called the plan of creation. The rules for classifying will no doubt
become simpler when we have a definite object in view. We possess no
pedigree or armorial bearings; and we have to discover and trace
the many diverging lines of descent in our natural genealogies, by
characters of any kind which have long been inherited. Rudimentary
organs will speak infallibly with respect to the nature of long-lost
structures. Species and groups of species which are called aberrant, and
which may fancifully be called living fossils, will aid us in forming a
picture of the ancient forms of life. Embryology will often reveal to us
the structure, in some degree obscured, of the prototypes of each great
class.

When we can feel assured that all the individuals of the same species,
and all the closely allied species of most genera, have, within a not
very remote period descended from one parent, and have migrated
from some one birth-place; and when we better know the many means
of migration, then, by the light which geology now throws, and will
continue to throw, on former changes of climate and of the level of the
land, we shall surely be enabled to trace in an admirable manner
the former migrations of the inhabitants of the whole world. Even at
present, by comparing the differences between the inhabitants of the
sea on the opposite sides of a continent, and the nature of the various
inhabitants of that continent in relation to their apparent means of
immigration, some light can be thrown on ancient geography.

The noble science of geology loses glory from the extreme imperfection
of the record. The crust of the earth, with its embedded remains, must
not be looked at as a well-filled museum, but as a poor collection
made at hazard and at rare intervals. The accumulation of each great
fossiliferous formation will be recognised as having depended on an
unusual occurrence of favourable circumstances, and the blank intervals
between the successive stages as having been of vast duration. But
we shall be able to gauge with some security the duration of these
intervals by a comparison of the preceding and succeeding organic
forms. We must be cautious in attempting to correlate as strictly
contemporaneous two formations, which do not include many identical
species, by the general succession of the forms of life. As species are
produced and exterminated by slowly acting and still existing causes,
and not by miraculous acts of creation; and as the most important of all
causes of organic change is one which is almost independent of altered
and perhaps suddenly altered physical conditions, namely, the mutual
relation of organism to organism--the improvement of one organism
entailing the improvement or the extermination of others; it follows,
that the amount of organic change in the fossils of consecutive
formations probably serves as a fair measure of the relative, though not
actual lapse of time. A number of species, however, keeping in a body
might remain for a long period unchanged, whilst within the same period,
several of these species, by migrating into new countries and coming
into competition with foreign associates, might become modified; so
that we must not overrate the accuracy of organic change as a measure of
time.

In the future I see open fields for far more important researches.
Psychology will be securely based on the foundation already well laid
by Mr. Herbert Spencer, that of the necessary acquirement of each mental
power and capacity by gradation. Much light will be thrown on the origin
of man and his history.

Authors of the highest eminence seem to be fully satisfied with the view
that each species has been independently created. To my mind it accords
better with what we know of the laws impressed on matter by the Creator,
that the production and extinction of the past and present inhabitants
of the world should have been due to secondary causes, like those
determining the birth and death of the individual. When I view all
beings not as special creations, but as the lineal descendants of some
few beings which lived long before the first bed of the Cambrian system
was deposited, they seem to me to become ennobled. Judging from the
past, we may safely infer that not one living species will transmit its
unaltered likeness to a distinct futurity. And of the species now living
very few will transmit progeny of any kind to a far distant futurity;
for the manner in which all organic beings are grouped, shows that the
greater number of species in each genus, and all the species in many
genera, have left no descendants, but have become utterly extinct. We
can so far take a prophetic glance into futurity as to foretell that it
will be the common and widely spread species, belonging to the larger
and dominant groups within each class, which will ultimately prevail and
procreate new and dominant species. As all the living forms of life are
the lineal descendants of those which lived long before the Cambrian
epoch, we may feel certain that the ordinary succession by generation
has never once been broken, and that no cataclysm has desolated the
whole world. Hence, we may look with some confidence to a secure future
of great length. And as natural selection works solely by and for the
good of each being, all corporeal and mental endowments will tend to
progress towards perfection.

It is interesting to contemplate a tangled bank, clothed with many
plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various
insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth,
and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different
from each other, and dependent upon each other in so complex a manner,
have all been produced by laws acting around us. These laws, taken in
the largest sense, being Growth with reproduction; Inheritance which is
almost implied by reproduction; Variability from the indirect and direct
action of the conditions of life, and from use and disuse; a Ratio of
Increase so high as to lead to a Struggle for Life, and as a consequence
to Natural Selection, entailing Divergence of Character and the
Extinction of less improved forms. Thus, from the war of nature, from
famine and death, the most exalted object which we are capable of
conceiving, namely, the production of the higher animals, directly
follows. There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several
powers, having been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms
or into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone circling on according
to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms
most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being evolved.


GLOSSARY OF THE PRINCIPAL SCIENTIFIC TERMS USED IN THE PRESENT VOLUME.

(I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. W.S. Dallas for this Glossary,
which has been given because several readers have complained to me
that some of the terms used were unintelligible to them. Mr. Dallas has
endeavoured to give the explanations of the terms in as popular a form
as possible.)

ABERRANT.--Forms or groups of animals or plants which deviate in
important characters from their nearest allies, so as not to be easily
included in the same group with them, are said to be aberrant.

ABERRATION (in Optics).--In the refraction of light by a convex lens the
rays passing through different parts of the lens are brought to a focus
at slightly different distances--this is called SPHERICAL ABERRATION; at
the same time the coloured rays are separated by the prismatic action of
the lens and likewise brought to a focus at different distances--this is
CHROMATIC ABERRATION.

ABNORMAL.--Contrary to the general rule.

ABORTED.--An organ is said to be aborted, when its development has been
arrested at a very early stage.

ALBINISM.--Albinos are animals in which the usual colouring matters
characteristic of the species have not been produced in the skin and its
appendages. Albinism is the state of being an albino.

ALGAE.--A class of plants including the ordinary sea-weeds and the
filamentous fresh-water weeds.

ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS.--This term is applied to a peculiar mode of
reproduction which prevails among many of the lower animals, in which
the egg produces a living form quite different from its parent, but from
which the parent-form is reproduced by a process of budding, or by the
division of the substance of the first product of the egg.

AMMONITES.--A group of fossil, spiral, chambered shells, allied to the
existing pearly Nautilus, but having the partitions between the chambers
waved in complicated patterns at their junction with the outer wall of
the shell.

ANALOGY.--That resemblance of structures which depends upon similarity
of function, as in the wings of insects and birds. Such structures are
said to be ANALOGOUS, and to be ANALOGUES of each other.

ANIMALCULE.--A minute animal: generally applied to those visible only by
the microscope.

ANNELIDS.--A class of worms in which the surface of the body exhibits
a more or less distinct division into rings or segments, generally
provided with appendages for locomotion and with gills. It includes the
ordinary marine worms, the earth-worms, and the leeches.

ANTENNAE.--Jointed organs appended to the head in Insects, Crustacea and
Centipedes, and not belonging to the mouth.

ANTHERS.--The summits of the stamens of flowers, in which the pollen or
fertilising dust is produced.

APLACENTALIA, APLACENTATA or APLACENTAL MAMMALS.--See MAMMALIA.

ARCHETYPAL.--Of or belonging to the Archetype, or ideal primitive form
upon which all the beings of a group seem to be organised.

ARTICULATA.--A great division of the Animal Kingdom characterised
generally by having the surface of the body divided into rings called
segments, a greater or less number of which are furnished with jointed
legs (such as Insects, Crustaceans and Centipedes).

ASYMMETRICAL.--Having the two sides unlike.

ATROPHIED.--Arrested in development at a very early stage.

BALANUS.--The genus including the common Acorn-shells which live in
abundance on the rocks of the sea-coast.

BATRACHIANS.--A class of animals allied to the Reptiles, but undergoing
a peculiar metamorphosis, in which the young animal is generally aquatic
and breathes by gills. (Examples, Frogs, Toads, and Newts.)

BOULDERS.--Large transported blocks of stone generally embedded in clays
or gravels.

BRACHIOPODA.--A class of marine Mollusca, or soft-bodied animals,
furnished with a bivalve shell, attached to submarine objects by a stalk
which passes through an aperture in one of the valves, and furnished
with fringed arms, by the action of which food is carried to the mouth.

BRANCHIAE.--Gills or organs for respiration in water.

BRANCHIAL.--Pertaining to gills or branchiae.

CAMBRIAN SYSTEM.--A series of very ancient Palaeozoic rocks, between the
Laurentian and the Silurian. Until recently these were regarded as the
oldest fossiliferous rocks.

CANIDAE.--The Dog-family, including the Dog, Wolf, Fox, Jackal, etc.

CARAPACE.--The shell enveloping the anterior part of the body in
Crustaceans generally; applied also to the hard shelly pieces of the
Cirripedes.

CARBONIFEROUS.--This term is applied to the great formation which
includes, among other rocks, the coal-measures. It belongs to the
oldest, or Palaeozoic, system of formations.

CAUDAL.--Of or belonging to the tail.

CEPHALOPODS.--The highest class of the Mollusca, or soft-bodied animals,
characterised by having the mouth surrounded by a greater or less
number of fleshy arms or tentacles, which, in most living species, are
furnished with sucking-cups. (Examples, Cuttle-fish, Nautilus.)

CETACEA.--An order of Mammalia, including the Whales, Dolphins, etc.,
having the form of the body fish-like, the skin naked, and only the fore
limbs developed.

CHELONIA.--An order of Reptiles including the Turtles, Tortoises, etc.

CIRRIPEDES.--An order of Crustaceans including the Barnacles and
Acorn-shells. Their young resemble those of many other Crustaceans in
form; but when mature they are always attached to other objects, either
directly or by means of a stalk, and their bodies are enclosed by a
calcareous shell composed of several pieces, two of which can open to
give issue to a bunch of curled, jointed tentacles, which represent the
limbs.

COCCUS.--The genus of Insects including the Cochineal. In these the
male is a minute, winged fly, and the female generally a motionless,
berry-like mass.

COCOON.--A case usually of silky material, in which insects are
frequently enveloped during the second or resting-stage (pupa) of
their existence. The term "cocoon-stage" is here used as equivalent to
"pupa-stage."

COELOSPERMOUS.--A term applied to those fruits of the Umbelliferae which
have the seed hollowed on the inner face.

COLEOPTERA.--Beetles, an order of Insects, having a biting mouth and the
first pair of wings more or less horny, forming sheaths for the second
pair, and usually meeting in a straight line down the middle of the
back.

COLUMN.--A peculiar organ in the flowers of Orchids, in which the
stamens, style and stigma (or the reproductive parts) are united.

COMPOSITAE or COMPOSITOUS PLANTS.--Plants in which the inflorescence
consists of numerous small flowers (florets) brought together into
a dense head, the base of which is enclosed by a common envelope.
(Examples, the Daisy, Dandelion, etc.)

CONFERVAE.--The filamentous weeds of fresh water.

CONGLOMERATE.--A rock made up of fragments of rock or pebbles, cemented
together by some other material.

COROLLA.--The second envelope of a flower usually composed of coloured,
leaf-like organs (petals), which may be united by their edges either in
the basal part or throughout.

CORRELATION.--The normal coincidence of one phenomenon, character, etc.,
with another.

CORYMB.--A bunch of flowers in which those springing from the lower part
of the flower stalks are supported on long stalks so as to be nearly on
a level with the upper ones.

COTYLEDONS.--The first or seed-leaves of plants.

CRUSTACEANS.--A class of articulated animals, having the skin of the
body generally more or less hardened by the deposition of calcareous
matter, breathing by means of gills. (Examples, Crab, Lobster, Shrimp,
etc.)

CURCULIO.--The old generic term for the Beetles known as Weevils,
characterised by their four-jointed feet, and by the head being produced
into a sort of beak, upon the sides of which the antennae are inserted.

CUTANEOUS.--Of or belonging to the skin.

DEGRADATION.--The wearing down of land by the action of the sea or of
meteoric agencies.

DENUDATION.--The wearing away of the surface of the land by water.

DEVONIAN SYSTEM or FORMATION.--A series of Palaeozoic rocks, including
the Old Red Sandstone.

DICOTYLEDONS, or DICOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS.--A class of plants characterised
by having two seed-leaves, by the formation of new wood between the bark
and the old wood (exogenous growth) and by the reticulation of the veins
of the leaves. The parts of the flowers are generally in multiples of
five.

DIFFERENTATION.--The separation or discrimination of parts or organs
which in simpler forms of life are more or less united.

DIMORPHIC.--Having two distinct forms.--DIMORPHISM is the condition of
the appearance of the same species under two dissimilar forms.

DIOECIOUS.--Having the organs of the sexes upon distinct individuals.

DIORITE.--A peculiar form of Greenstone.

DORSAL.--Of or belonging to the back.

EDENTATA.--A peculiar order of Quadrupeds, characterised by the absence
of at least the middle incisor (front) teeth in both jaws. (Examples,
the Sloths and Armadillos.)

ELYTRA.--The hardened fore-wings of Beetles, serving as sheaths for the
membranous hind-wings, which constitute the true organs of flight.

EMBRYO.--The young animal undergoing development within the egg or womb.

EMBRYOLOGY.--The study of the development of the embryo.

ENDEMIC.--Peculiar to a given locality.

ENTOMOSTRACA.--A division of the class Crustacea, having all the
segments of the body usually distinct, gills attached to the feet or
organs of the mouth, and the feet fringed with fine hairs. They are
generally of small size.

EOCENE.--The earliest of the three divisions of the Tertiary epoch
of geologists. Rocks of this age contain a small proportion of shells
identical with species now living.

EPHEMEROUS INSECTS.--Insects allied to the May-fly.

FAUNA.--The totality of the animals naturally inhabiting a certain
country or region, or which have lived during a given geological period.

FELIDAE.--The Cat-family.

FERAL.--Having become wild from a state of cultivation or domestication.

FLORA.--The totality of the plants growing naturally in a country, or
during a given geological period.

FLORETS.--Flowers imperfectly developed in some respects, and collected
into a dense spike or head, as in the Grasses, the Dandelion, etc.

FOETAL.--Of or belonging to the foetus, or embryo in course of
development.

FORAMINIFERA.--A class of animals of very low organisation and generally
of small size, having a jelly-like body, from the surface of which
delicate filaments can be given off and retracted for the prehension
of external objects, and having a calcareous or sandy shell, usually
divided into chambers and perforated with small apertures.

FOSSILIFEROUS.--Containing fossils.

FOSSORIAL.--Having a faculty of digging. The Fossorial Hymenoptera are a
group of Wasp-like Insects, which burrow in sandy soil to make nests for
their young.

FRENUM (pl. FRENA).--A small band or fold of skin.

FUNGI (sing. FUNGUS).--A class of cellular plants, of which Mushrooms,
Toadstools, and Moulds, are familiar examples.

FURCULA.--The forked bone formed by the union of the collar-bones in
many birds, such as the common Fowl.

GALLINACEOUS BIRDS.--An order of birds of which the common Fowl, Turkey,
and Pheasant, are well-known examples.

GALLUS.--The genus of birds which includes the common Fowl.

GANGLION.--A swelling or knot from which nerves are given off as from a
centre.

GANOID FISHES.--Fishes covered with peculiar enamelled bony scales. Most
of them are extinct.

GERMINAL VESICLE.--A minute vesicle in the eggs of animals, from which
the development of the embryo proceeds.

GLACIAL PERIOD.--A period of great cold and of enormous extension of ice
upon the surface of the earth. It is believed that glacial periods have
occurred repeatedly during the geological history of the earth, but
the term is generally applied to the close of the Tertiary epoch, when
nearly the whole of Europe was subjected to an arctic climate.

GLAND.--An organ which secretes or separates some peculiar product from
the blood or sap of animals or plants.

GLOTTIS.--The opening of the windpipe into the oesophagus or gullet.

GNEISS.--A rock approaching granite in composition, but more or less
laminated, and really produced by the alteration of a sedimentary
deposit after its consolidation.

GRALLATORES.--The so-called wading-birds (storks, cranes, snipes, etc.),
which are generally furnished with long legs, bare of feathers above the
heel, and have no membranes between the toes.

GRANITE.--A rock consisting essentially of crystals of felspar and mica
in a mass of quartz.

HABITAT.--The locality in which a plant or animal naturally lives.

HEMIPTERA.--An order or sub-order of insects, characterised by the
possession of a jointed beak or rostrum, and by having the fore-wings
horny in the basal portion and membranous at the extremity, where they
cross each other. This group includes the various species of bugs.

HERMAPHRODITE.--Possessing the organs of both sexes.

HOMOLOGY.--That relation between parts which results from their
development from corresponding embryonic parts, either in different
animals, as in the case of the arm of man, the fore-leg of a quadruped,
and the wing of a bird; or in the same individual, as in the case of the
fore and hind legs in quadrupeds, and the segments or rings and their
appendages of which the body of a worm, a centipede, etc., is composed.
The latter is called serial homology. The parts which stand in such a
relation to each other are said to be homologous, and one such part
or organ is called the homologue of the other. In different plants
the parts of the flower are homologous, and in general these parts are
regarded as homologous with leaves.

HOMOPTERA.--An order or sub-order of insects having (like the Hemiptera)
a jointed beak, but in which the fore-wings are either wholly membranous
or wholly leathery, The Cicadae, frog-hoppers, and Aphides, are
well-known examples.

HYBRID.--The offspring of the union of two distinct species.

HYMENOPTERA.--An order of insects possessing biting jaws and usually
four membranous wings in which there are a few veins. Bees and wasps are
familiar examples of this group.

HYPERTROPHIED.--Excessively developed.

ICHNEUMONIDAE.--A family of hymenopterous insects, the members of which
lay their eggs in the bodies or eggs of other insects.

IMAGO.--The perfect (generally winged) reproductive state of an insect.

INDIGENES.--The aboriginal animal or vegetable inhabitants of a country
or region.

INFLORESCENCE.--The mode of arrangement of the flowers of plants.

INFUSORIA.--A class of microscopic animalcules, so called from their
having originally been observed in infusions of vegetable matters. They
consist of a gelatinous material enclosed in a delicate membrane, the
whole or part of which is furnished with short vibrating hairs (called
cilia), by means of which the animalcules swim through the water or
convey the minute particles of their food to the orifice of the mouth.

INSECTIVOROUS.--Feeding on insects.

INVERTEBRATA, or INVERTEBRATE ANIMALS.--Those animals which do not
possess a backbone or spinal column.

LACUNAE.--Spaces left among the tissues in some of the lower animals
and serving in place of vessels for the circulation of the fluids of the
body.

LAMELLATED.--Furnished with lamellae or little plates.

LARVA (pl. LARVAE).--The first condition of an insect at its issuing
from the egg, when it is usually in the form of a grub, caterpillar, or
maggot.

LARYNX.--The upper part of the windpipe opening into the gullet.

LAURENTIAN.--A group of greatly altered and very ancient rocks, which is
greatly developed along the course of the St. Laurence, whence the name.
It is in these that the earliest known traces of organic bodies have
been found.

LEGUMINOSAE.--An order of plants represented by the common peas and
beans, having an irregular flower in which one petal stands up like a
wing, and the stamens and pistil are enclosed in a sheath formed by two
other petals. The fruit is a pod (or legume).

LEMURIDAE.--A group of four-handed animals, distinct from the monkeys
and approaching the insectivorous quadrupeds in some of their characters
and habits. Its members have the nostrils curved or twisted, and a claw
instead of a nail upon the first finger of the hind hands.

LEPIDOPTERA.--An order of insects, characterised by the possession of
a spiral proboscis, and of four large more or less scaly wings. It
includes the well-known butterflies and moths.

LITTORAL.--Inhabiting the seashore.

LOESS.--A marly deposit of recent (Post-Tertiary) date, which occupies a
great part of the valley of the Rhine.

MALACOSTRACA.--The higher division of the Crustacea, including the
ordinary crabs, lobsters, shrimps, etc., together with the woodlice and
sand-hoppers.

MAMMALIA.--The highest class of animals, including the ordinary hairy
quadrupeds, the whales and man, and characterised by the production
of living young which are nourished after birth by milk from the
teats (MAMMAE, MAMMARY GLANDS) of the mother. A striking difference in
embryonic development has led to the division of this class into two
great groups; in one of these, when the embryo has attained a certain
stage, a vascular connection, called the PLACENTA, is formed between the
embryo and the mother; in the other this is wanting, and the young are
produced in a very incomplete state. The former, including the greater
part of the class, are called PLACENTAL MAMMALS; the latter,
or APLACENTAL MAMMALS, include the Marsupials and Monotremes
(ORNITHORHYNCHUS).

MAMMIFEROUS.--Having mammae or teats (see MAMMALIA).

MANDIBLES.--in insects, the first or uppermost pair of jaws, which are
generally solid, horny, biting organs. In birds the term is applied
to both jaws with their horny coverings. In quadrupeds the mandible is
properly the lower jaw.

MARSUPIALS.--An order of Mammalia in which the young are born in a
very incomplete state of development, and carried by the mother,
while sucking, in a ventral pouch (marsupium), such as the kangaroos,
opossums, etc. (see MAMMALIA).

MAXILLAE.--in insects, the second or lower pair of jaws, which
are composed of several joints and furnished with peculiar jointed
appendages called palpi, or feelers.

MELANISM.--The opposite of albinism; an undue development of colouring
material in the skin and its appendages.

METAMORPHIC ROCKS.--Sedimentary rocks which have undergone alteration,
generally by the action of heat, subsequently to their deposition and
consolidation.

MOLLUSCA.--One of the great divisions of the animal kingdom, including
those animals which have a soft body, usually furnished with a shell,
and in which the nervous ganglia, or centres, present no definite
general arrangement. They are generally known under the denomination of
"shellfish"; the cuttle-fish, and the common snails, whelks, oysters,
mussels, and cockles, may serve as examples of them.

MONOCOTYLEDONS, or MONOCOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS.--Plants in which the seed
sends up only a single seed-leaf (or cotyledon); characterised by the
absence of consecutive layers of wood in the stem (endogenous growth),
by the veins of the leaves being generally straight, and by the parts of
the flowers being generally in multiples of three. (Examples, grasses,
lilies, orchids, palms, etc.)

MORAINES.--The accumulations of fragments of rock brought down by
glaciers.

MORPHOLOGY.--The law of form or structure independent of function.

MYSIS-STAGE.--A stage in the development of certain crustaceans
(prawns), in which they closely resemble the adults of a genus (Mysis)
belonging to a slightly lower group.

NASCENT.--Commencing development.

NATATORY.--Adapted for the purpose of swimming.

NAUPLIUS-FORM.--The earliest stage in the development of many Crustacea,
especially belonging to the lower groups. In this stage the animal has a
short body, with indistinct indications of a division into segments,
and three pairs of fringed limbs. This form of the common fresh-water
CYCLOPS was described as a distinct genus under the name of NAUPLIUS.

NEURATION.--The arrangement of the veins or nervures in the wings of
insects.

NEUTERS.--Imperfectly developed females of certain social insects (such
as ants and bees), which perform all the labours of the community.
Hence, they are also called WORKERS.

NICTITATING MEMBRANE.--A semi-transparent membrane, which can be drawn
across the eye in birds and reptiles, either to moderate the effects of
a strong light or to sweep particles of dust, etc., from the surface of
the eye.

OCELLI.--The simple eyes or stemmata of insects, usually situated on the
crown of the head between the great compound eyes.

OESOPHAGUS.--The gullet.

OOLITIC.--A great series of secondary rocks, so called from the texture
of some of its members, which appear to be made up of a mass of small
EGG-LIKE calcareous bodies.

OPERCULUM.--A calcareous plate employed by many Molluscae to close the
aperture of their shell. The OPERCULAR VALVES of Cirripedes are those
which close the aperture of the shell.

ORBIT.--The bony cavity for the reception of the eye.

ORGANISM.--An organised being, whether plant or animal.

ORTHOSPERMOUS.--A term applied to those fruits of the Umbelliferae which
have the seed straight.

OSCULANT.--Forms or groups apparently intermediate between and
connecting other groups are said to be osculant.

OVA.--Eggs.

OVARIUM or OVARY (in plants).--The lower part of the pistil or female
organ of the flower, containing the ovules or incipient seeds; by growth
after the other organs of the flower have fallen, it usually becomes
converted into the fruit.

OVIGEROUS.--Egg-bearing.

OVULES (of plants).--The seeds in the earliest condition.

PACHYDERMS.--A group of Mammalia, so called from their thick skins, and
including the elephant, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, etc.

PALAEOZOIC.--The oldest system of fossiliferous rocks.

PALPI.--Jointed appendages to some of the organs of the mouth in insects
and Crustacea.

PAPILIONACEAE.--An order of plants (see LEGUMINOSAE), The flowers of
these plants are called PAPILIONACEOUS, or butterfly-like, from the
fancied resemblance of the expanded superior petals to the wings of a
butterfly.

PARASITE.--An animal or plant living upon or in, and at the expense of,
another organism.

PARTHENOGENESIS.--The production of living organisms from unimpregnated
eggs or seeds.

PEDUNCULATED.--Supported upon a stem or stalk. The pedunculated oak has
its acorns borne upon a footstool.

PELORIA or PELORISM.--The appearance of regularity of structure in the
flowers of plants which normally bear irregular flowers.

PELVIS.--The bony arch to which the hind limbs of vertebrate animals are
articulated.

PETALS.--The leaves of the corolla, or second circle of organs in a
flower. They are usually of delicate texture and brightly coloured.

PHYLLODINEOUS.--Having flattened, leaf-like twigs or leafstalks instead
of true leaves.

PIGMENT.--The colouring material produced generally in the superficial
parts of animals. The cells secreting it are called PIGMENT-CELLS.

PINNATE.--Bearing leaflets on each side of a central stalk.

PISTILS.--The female organs of a flower, which occupy a position in the
centre of the other floral organs. The pistil is generally divisible
into the ovary or germen, the style and the stigma.

PLACENTALIA, PLACENTATA.--or PLACENTAL MAMMALS, See MAMMALIA.

PLANTIGRADES.--Quadrupeds which walk upon the whole sole of the foot,
like the bears.

PLASTIC.--Readily capable of change.

PLEISTOCENE PERIOD.--The latest portion of the Tertiary epoch.

PLUMULE (in plants).--The minute bud between the seed-leaves of
newly-germinated plants.

PLUTONIC ROCKS.--Rocks supposed to have been produced by igneous action
in the depths of the earth.

POLLEN.--The male element in flowering plants; usually a fine dust
produced by the anthers, which, by contact with the stigma effects the
fecundation of the seeds. This impregnation is brought about by means of
tubes (POLLEN-TUBES) which issue from the pollen-grains adhering to the
stigma, and penetrate through the tissues until they reach the ovary.

POLYANDROUS (flowers).--Flowers having many stamens.

POLYGAMOUS PLANTS.--Plants in which some flowers are unisexual and
others hermaphrodite. The unisexual (male and female) flowers, may be on
the same or on different plants.

POLYMORPHIC.--Presenting many forms.

POLYZOARY.--The common structure formed by the cells of the Polyzoa,
such as the well-known seamats.

PREHENSILE.--Capable of grasping.

PREPOTENT.--Having a superiority of power.

PRIMARIES.--The feathers forming the tip of the wing of a bird, and
inserted upon that part which represents the hand of man.

PROCESSES.--Projecting portions of bones, usually for the attachment of
muscles, ligaments, etc.

PROPOLIS.--A resinous material collected by the hivebees from the
opening buds of various trees.

PROTEAN.--Exceedingly variable.

PROTOZOA.--The lowest great division of the animal kingdom. These
animals are composed of a gelatinous material, and show scarcely any
trace of distinct organs. The Infusoria, Foraminifera, and sponges, with
some other forms, belong to this division.

PUPA (pl. PUPAE).--The second stage in the development of an insect,
from which it emerges in the perfect (winged) reproductive form. In most
insects the PUPAL STAGE is passed in perfect repose. The CHRYSALIS is
the pupal state of butterflies.

RADICLE.--The minute root of an embryo plant.

RAMUS.--One half of the lower jaw in the Mammalia. The portion which
rises to articulate with the skull is called the ASCENDING RAMUS.

RANGE.--The extent of country over which a plant or animal is naturally
spread. RANGE IN TIME expresses the distribution of a species or group
through the fossiliferous beds of the earth's crust.

RETINA.--The delicate inner coat of the eye, formed by nervous filaments
spreading from the optic nerve, and serving for the perception of the
impressions produced by light.

RETROGRESSION.--Backward development. When an animal, as it approaches
maturity, becomes less perfectly organised than might be expected
from its early stages and known relationships, it is said to undergo a
RETROGRADE DEVELOPMENT or METAMORPHOSIS.

RHIZOPODS.--A class of lowly organised animals (Protozoa), having a
gelatinous body, the surface of which can be protruded in the form of
root-like processes or filaments, which serve for locomotion and
the prehension of food. The most important order is that of the
Foraminifera.

RODENTS.--The gnawing Mammalia, such as the rats, rabbits, and
squirrels. They are especially characterised by the possession of a
single pair of chisel-like cutting teeth in each jaw, between which and
the grinding teeth there is a great gap.

RUBUS.--The bramble genus.

RUDIMENTARY.--Very imperfectly developed.

RUMINANTS.--The group of quadrupeds which ruminate or chew the cud, such
as oxen, sheep, and deer. They have divided hoofs, and are destitute of
front teeth in the upper jaw.

SACRAL.--Belonging to the sacrum, or the bone composed usually of two
or more united vertebrae to which the sides of the pelvis in vertebrate
animals are attached.

SARCODE.--The gelatinous material of which the bodies of the lowest
animals (Protozoa) are composed.

SCUTELLAE.--The horny plates with which the feet of birds are generally
more or less covered, especially in front.

SEDIMENTARY FORMATIONS.--Rocks deposited as sediments from water.

SEGMENTS.--The transverse rings of which the body of an articulate
animal or annelid is composed.

SEPALS.--The leaves or segments of the calyx, or outermost envelope
of an ordinary flower. They are usually green, but sometimes brightly
coloured.

SERRATURES.--Teeth like those of a saw.

SESSILE.--Not supported on a stem or footstalk.

SILURIAN SYSTEM.--A very ancient system of fossiliferous rocks belonging
to the earlier part of the Palaeozoic series.

SPECIALISATION.--The setting apart of a particular organ for the
performance of a particular function.

SPINAL CORD.--The central portion of the nervous system in the
Vertebrata, which descends from the brain through the arches of the
vertebrae, and gives off nearly all the nerves to the various organs of
the body.

STAMENS.--The male organs of flowering plants, standing in a circle
within the petals. They usually consist of a filament and an anther,
the anther being the essential part in which the pollen, or fecundating
dust, is formed.

STERNUM.--The breast-bone.

STIGMA.--The apical portion of the pistil in flowering plants.

STIPULES.--Small leafy organs placed at the base of the footstalks of
the leaves in many plants.

STYLE.--The middle portion of the perfect pistil, which rises like a
column from the ovary and supports the stigma at its summit.

SUBCUTANEOUS.--Situated beneath the skin.

SUCTORIAL.--Adapted for sucking.

SUTURES (in the skull).--The lines of junction of the bones of which the
skull is composed.

TARSUS (pl. TARSI).--The jointed feet of articulate animals, such as
insects.

TELEOSTEAN FISHES.--Fishes of the kind familiar to us in the present
day, having the skeleton usually completely ossified and the scales
horny.

TENTACULA or TENTACLES.--Delicate fleshy organs of prehension or touch
possessed by many of the lower animals.

TERTIARY.--The latest geological epoch, immediately preceding the
establishment of the present order of things.

TRACHEA.--The windpipe or passage for the admission of air to the lungs.

TRIDACTYLE.--Three-fingered, or composed of three movable parts attached
to a common base.

TRILOBITES.--A peculiar group of extinct crustaceans, somewhat
resembling the woodlice in external form, and, like some of them,
capable of rolling themselves up into a ball. Their remains are found
only in the Palaeozoic rocks, and most abundantly in those of Silurian
age.

TRIMORPHIC.--Presenting three distinct forms.

UMBELLIFERAE.--An order of plants in which the flowers, which contain
five stamens and a pistil with two styles, are supported upon footstalks
which spring from the top of the flower stem and spread out like the
wires of an umbrella, so as to bring all the flowers in the same head
(UMBEL) nearly to the same level. (Examples, parsley and carrot.)

UNGULATA.--Hoofed quadrupeds.

UNICELLULAR.--Consisting of a single cell.

VASCULAR.--Containing blood-vessels.

VERMIFORM.--Like a worm.

VERTEBRATA or VERTEBRATE ANIMALS.--The highest division of the animal
kingdom, so called from the presence in most cases of a backbone
composed of numerous joints or VERTEBRAE, which constitutes the centre
of the skeleton and at the same time supports and protects the central
parts of the nervous system.

WHORLS.--The circles or spiral lines in which the parts of plants are
arranged upon the axis of growth.

WORKERS.--See neuters.

ZOEA-STAGE.--The earliest stage in the development of many of the
higher Crustacea, so called from the name of ZOEA applied to these young
animals when they were supposed to constitute a peculiar genus.

ZOOIDS.--In many of the lower animals (such as the Corals, Medusae,
etc.) reproduction takes place in two ways, namely, by means of eggs and
by a process of budding with or without separation from the parent of
the product of the latter, which is often very different from that of
the egg. The individuality of the species is represented by the whole
of the form produced between two sexual reproductions; and these forms,
which are apparently individual animals, have been called ZOOIDE.

End of Project Gutenberg's On the Origin of Species, by Charles Darwin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES ***

***** This file should be named 2009.txt or 2009.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/0/2009/

Produced by Sue Asscher

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
